after this video you'll be able to add
an MVC model view controller structure
to your node applications this is
actually two classes combined into one
video of our free 30-week software
engineering boot camp if you've ever
wanted to learn how to code you found
the right place we are 38 000 strong on
Discord so if you have any questions
that come up as you watch the video
we'll be happy to answer them that's
leonnewell.com
Discord see you soon
good morning good afternoon good evening
where you're coming from hope you all
are doing well hey does this work hope
you all are doing well hey welcome back
another week another dollar let's get it
done hey yeah speed hey what's going on
Rascal 2 with the raid thank you for
coming through with the crew what's
going on everybody
hey
Thompson in the house hey got to meet
some of you at the meetups I love it I
love seeing everybody's seeing each
other at meetups I gotta go to meet us I
got to go outside you know how I am I'm
online but now I gotta go outside
what's going on everybody
welcome back welcome back tonight we get
into some
MVC adding some much needed architecture
to our crud applications our full stack
applications it's one of the most
important things we'll cover as we get
to the tail end of program so uh quick
things no slides for tonight we're
jumping right into code uh so no worry
about uh having slides or anything like
that we have one image I'm going to
share with you and the starter code is
on our Discord if you're new around
these parts you can do exclamation point
discard Discord and uh it'll get you all
the code that you need for today
hey
what's going on so uh since there's no
slides I'm gonna ask everyone please
check in exclamation point check in if
you have not already uh that does not
check you in but it gives you the link
uh for tonight's tweet go ahead and like
and retweet that for me please uh and if
you haven't already if you need to catch
up with your part of the ketchup crew uh
class 44 and 45 are now on YouTube I
would appreciate folks giving that a
thumbs up just to help with the
algorithm it's been a while since we
posted the YouTube let's uh make sure
that that video doesn't tank
I'm good to see everybody hope you all
had a wonderful weekend
hey what's going on everybody uh as
always I always like to start off with a
few questions let's give folks a few
seconds to get in here if you have some
questions I got some answers go ahead
and shoot off your questions here in
chat happy to answer
do we Fork the code for class tonight
that's up to you you can always fork and
and clone it down if you want um that
way you have like your own version if
you want
um eventually I'm gonna ask you to to
add on to this so if you want your own
version that's okay it's okay just to
clone down to
will baby learn coding too if they want
I hope they do but that that'll be up to
them
is that cold brew coffee no it's um
it's uh it's like an honored Palmer in a
can yeah
uh
what version were you saying yeah this
is the MVC version uh the link to the
code is in today's Discord message in
the following materials Channel
we need 100 devs Meetup convention you
know there's a lot of things that I want
to start like once we get to the end of
this cohort and I have a chance to
really kind of have some more time to to
to invest in things that aren't in class
that's one of the things people have
asked for a long time I think that could
be fun to do something or maybe like
attached to another convention that's
already happening but have our own
Meetup yeah I think that'd be fun
yeah
so I'm about it there's a lot of other
big projects too that I want to get get
going
um I've been working shopping this idea
called a hundred maintainers so there's
a lot of projects that I think could
really benefit the community a lot of
tools and resources that I think could
be really helpful and so I would love to
find a way to have folks that want to
contribute through writing code and
helping build those projects I have an
Avenue to do that which is another thing
that people kind of ask for so lots of
stuff uh to do yeah and it's also been
really cool seeing so many folks build
so many wonderful things for 100 devs I
want a way to like highlight them and
make them feel a little special so 100
maintainers is coming soon lots and lots
of little things that I want to be able
to have some time to focus on which I
think will be fun
what about translating to other
languages
um so I would be down one of the
problems though is that I wouldn't want
folks to
um not get the support that they need so
our Discord is English right
um and that's just because we we can
provide consistent moderation in English
and consistent support in English my
worry about translating to other
languages which I've definitely talked
to like folks that wanted to help
translate everything is that then they
wouldn't get the same level of support
so
um something maybe way down the line
once we have more folks and more folks
that want to help out in different
languages
um could be could be a real possibility
yeah
but for now probably not a little too
much for us to take on
Leon will we ever move on to other
programming languages no because this
isn't a coding bootcamp this is a
getting a job boot camp and right now
the stuff I'm teaching is going to open
up the most doors for you to get a job
now a lot of my students go on to learn
other languages entirely during the job
hunt a lot of my students will go on to
use complete different languages on the
job but what you realize early on is
that the languages that you learn right
now really have no impact on your job
opportunities a lot of folks think that
if they have to learn like the specific
set of languages they have to learn
these very specific set of skills but
time and time again it's not true if you
know the fundamentals you have really
strong projects and you show the ability
to learn quickly anyone can bang out a
few tutorials over the weekend to add
that skill to their to their application
should they need that on their resume or
on their portfolio for that specific job
so by the time you leave 100 devs you
lean mean interviewing machines and part
of that is the ability to pick up new
things very quickly so you can talk
about them in the interviews so when we
get to the hunt that's gonna be
something we talk a lot about you're
going to customize each of your
applications to the company that you're
applying if they are using PHP then your
application is going to have some PHP on
it right even though it's not something
that we touched during this program also
each of your localities are completely
different the job market in each city is
completely different there are some
things that are really popping off in
certain areas that aren't in others and
so you're going to add those little
cherries on top and so that's something
we'll talk a lot about I'm going to show
you how to do that quickly easily I'm
going to show you how to do that when we
get there but we're not there yet we got
we got fundamental stuff core stuff to
be focusing on that's going to help you
with any interview not just kind of like
a very specific Niche set of skills and
so that's what we're going to build up
to
and the other thing too is like right
now I've helped students like in my day
job in Boston Philadelphia Pittsburgh
even New York then I have helped
hundreds of other folks get jobs around
the world and
if you have a fundamental base of how
you go about the application process it
really doesn't matter what you know
it really doesn't if you go about
applying the right way if you go about
the hunt the right way it kind of
doesn't really matter your technical
skills all that much so we'll get there
we're not there yet
do one or two more questions and then uh
we'll jump in
best dad jokes since you've been since
you've been a a dad a lot of people blew
up my Twitter DMS with dad jokes I
appreciate y'all thank you
um also uh I figured out like using
uh the voice input on my iPhone has been
a game changer if you notice I reply to
every ask Leon message so if you ever
ever have a question that only I can
answer right if you ever have a question
that only you think only I could answer
um you we have the ask Leon chat on
Discord sometimes it got really backed
up but I just cranked through over two
nights just using the voice input on my
uh on my iPhone and so if the the
responses seemed a little weird there
wasn't punctuation uh that was because I
was using voice to text but I cranked
through like 200 messages on
um Discord and then like a whole bunch
of Twitter DMS and so uh yeah it was fun
I had a lot of a lot of dad jokes
um
one was um
I had a job crushing cans it was so
depressing
that's what you came here for folks
that's what you came here for
all right
I can't see the question
uh does anyone have trouble running
today's code on the server yes uh you
should not be able to run my code
because your IP address will not be
whitelisted on my mongodb instance so
even though I have the EnV file in there
it's not something you're gonna have to
get you're not gonna be able to get that
running you're gonna have to connect
your own mongodb instance like your own
Atlas instance for it to work
fully
cool all right folks let's get into this
a lot of fun stuff to cover tonight
um but the big thing that we are
covering is MVC model view controller
when we first started
100 devs there was one overarching
pattern that we always used right what
was that pattern that enabled us to work
with other developers was that pattern
that was our Guiding Light in the
beginning
yeah it was separation of concern so
this idea that we're going to keep our
HTML separate from our CSS we're going
to keep our JavaScript separate from
either of those things and we wouldn't
mix it and the reason why we did that
right the reason why we did that is so
that when we are working with other
Developers
they knew where to go to make changes
right so if they wanted to make
something pink they went to the CSS they
wanted to add another paragraph they
went to the HTML they wanted to make
something wiggle they went to the
JavaScript and if all our developers are
following those separation of concerns
it made our job as developers easier
and enabled us to have a little bit of
abstraction right a little bit of
abstraction meaning that we could focus
on just the HTML and not worry about
breaking the JavaScript now MVC model
view controller brings that same level
of ability to work with other developers
it brings the same level of organization
to our backend code right now we're
doing stuff that's a hot mess right for
the longest time when we first started
out right when we first started out with
our backend node code we had all of our
all of our node in one big file we had
our HTTP module we had our FS module and
there was a lot of stuff in that one
file
what would be a major problem of having
all that code in one file it worked we
could build a full stack web application
but what were some of the problems with
having all that in one file
yeah it was messy it was hard to debug
uh one edit could break it right hard to
maintain right and so there's a lot of
things here right if all of our code was
in one file it's really hard for us as a
development team to work together to
build stuff right we're always afraid
that our one change will break
everything else also we don't have the
ability to hand off different parts of
the project the different members of our
team and so as we get to the end of
program with 100 devs we're gonna be
building a lot of big meaty projects so
we built a to-do list which is a great
kind of example of how things work but
we're going to move into building social
networking apps we're going to build an
Instagram like clone together with all
the bits and Bobs and then you're going
to have some projects where you're
building full stack apps together as a
team right develop very rarely work
alone and so we have to practice those
skills as what it means to work as a
development team and so MVC model view
controller brings a level of
organizational to our code that enables
us to work well with other developers to
make changes and not lose sleep at the
end of the night and to know where to go
when we want to make those changes at
the end of the day right and so just
like separation of concerns helped us on
the front end MVC is going to help us on
the back end
cool
so I love this image uh it's from the
goat uh travesty media it's from one of
their original videos that I had you
watch if you have not watched their
video that I gave you for homework you
must watch that video it's super
important you have to watch that video
so I love this image from that from them
we're going to use it for the first walk
through MVC and then we have a little
bit more of a complex one
um that we're gonna walk through so
shout out to the goat
um
so many wonderful videos so many great
videos on MVC specifically as well so
definitely give those a watch as well
now I'm going to give a warning before I
jump into it tonight is about seeing and
understanding the why
why we make certain decisions why we do
certain things I don't need you to walk
away with the raw knowing how to build
and knowing the exact code right that's
not the goal tonight the goal tonight is
to understand why to ask lots of good
questions about why we do things this
way what we might benefit from by doing
it this way but the Nitty Gritty details
is not for right now right now
we are going to have office hours on
Sunday so anything that doesn't make
sense tonight no worries come back on
Sunday we're going to take as long as we
need to make sure everything sinks in
and that we can actually follow all the
Nitty Gritty I am going to be jumping
around a lot I'm going to be showing you
a lot of different Legos that we have to
build together if you haven't done the
homework if you haven't taken a peek at
this code it can be a little
overwhelming at first that's okay give
me a chance to walk through it ask
questions we're going to take our time
and we're going to come back on Sunday
and do it from scratch meaning we'll
type everything out we'll see it line by
line okay you have to give yourself some
Grace with this level of organization
we're taking something simple and adding
some complexity so that in the long run
we can be more organized and be able to
make the changes that we want to change
and be able to work with the team
members we want to work with so
it's okay
it's okay A lot of times can be
overwhelming for the first run through
that's okay we're gonna come back on
Sunday and do it again but my goal is to
get the why to you and for you to
understand at a high level concept what
MVC can do for you
cool
you ready
already so
I have a very simple application
here I have my application running on
localhost 2121
and I can refresh this page
and it takes me to this wonderful home
page
I also have the ability right I also
have the ability to click on new to-do
list
and be taken to a different page that
has my actual to-do list on it so what
you might have noticed and it's a little
hard to see it's a little tiny up here
the route is to do's and on localhost
2121 it's just my root route route so
now we have a little bit more advanced
routing right we have a little bit more
about routing meaning that we can have
like our home page right and we can have
our to-do's
more pain go take a nap you don't have
to be here catch the VOD go to sleep
if you're sleepy go to sleep anybody's
here that's sleepy go to sleep you don't
have to watch the VOD take care of
yourself
why are you here go take care of
yourself Health First all right so we
have two different routes right we have
two different routes we have our home
page right and we have our to-do's now
a wonderful thing here is we are going
to set up our code to start listening
for all these different routes to start
listening for all these different types
of requests and we're going to add
organization to walk through them now
with MVC we have a very common pattern
we have our users that are our
client-side devices and these
client-side devices are going to make
requests so far we've seen a structure
that looks like this we had our
client-side device on the left and we
said we made requests to our server
and sometimes that server would make
requests to our let's say database if
need be
right and so for all the applications
we've seen so far that are full stack
applications we had clients making
requests our servers were set up to hear
those requests and then the server has
some code running on it right the server
had some code running on it that could
hear those requests
and then know what to do what was that
code that could listen for our request
and know what to do that was coded to
know what we do
yeah that was our API our API was set up
to listen for those requests and then
know what to do
it really doesn't change when we
introduce MVC when we introduce MVC it's
just a little bit more layers in who's
hearing the request who's handling the
request and then what happens but the
same idea exists our client-side devices
are making requests to our servers our
servers hear those requests and then a
bunch of different stuff can happen the
problem right now is
the server side that's listening for
those requests all that code was really
just in one file right it was in one
location and when you start to work with
more and more people what are some
problems we're gonna run into by having
our API in One Singular file all the
server stuff in One Singular file
everything that needs to happen server
side in one file what what are some
problems that we're going to run into
organization could be a problem
confusion on how to change things
absolutely can be a problem
never find anything when it's too big no
encapsulation love it
yeah too much overload there's too much
going on and right now when it's just
you right when you're just by yourself
and it's just you working on an
application you can work through the
muck right no problem work through the
muck you'll get through it but when you
are working with a team you need to be
able to hand off different pieces right
you need to hand off different pieces
for different people to work on at the
same time if all your code is in One
Singular file then it's not only like
hard to walk through everything but how
are you going to make changes at the
same time also what if something breaks
it breaks all the other code and so
while this has worked so far with our
server having all the kind of code in
one location one file we really need to
move away from that so that it's easier
for us to work on the same projects
together it's easier to debug and find
our errors it's easier for when
something breaks it doesn't break the
entire project and that we can start
having some interchangeability in our
code base which I'll explain in a second
cool
so to get around having all of our code
in this singular location our singular
like server.js file we're going to
introduce an architecture Paradigm a way
of organizing our code that makes it
easy to do all the things we just talked
about so we still have our client-side
device and this person right here
represents our client-side device they
are using a browser whether it be Chrome
Firefox so far whatever you want to be
they're using a client-side device
now they are going to make requests from
this client-side device and as that
request comes to our server there is
going to be some code that's listening
for this request and knows where to
where to go next
right so the router is kind of the first
touch point the request is left the
client side the router hears the request
and the router wants to hand off that
request to a controller
and you can think of a controller as
just someone in the middle a middle
person right somebody that's going to
hear a specific request and then know
what to do with that request to either
maybe hand off that request directly to
a view they maybe hand that request off
to a model which we'll talk about in a
second
it's gonna know what to do kind of what
our API has been doing right like it
knows what to do we're adding another
level here so
our clients make a request the first
touch point is going to be a router and
the router is going to hand off that
request to a specific middle person
that middle person then knows what to do
with that request so you can see our
applications starting to have a bunch of
controllers that are all coded right
that are all coded to do different
things a bunch of Smurfs sitting on the
Block that all know what to do when
certain requests come in from the client
cool traffic Smurf exactly you could
think of our controllers as traffic
Smurfs now
the beautiful thing about this is
sometimes our web applications are going
to want to do simple stuff and sometimes
our web applications are going to want
to do some pretty complex stuff let's
think about this very first thing that I
did here where I was just on the main
page I refreshed the page what type of
request did I just make for my
client-side device
I made a get request to my server now
what do we know what is the thing that's
going to be that's going to be expecting
that get request what's the part of my
code that we're now going to have we're
going to see the code in a bit but let's
talk higher level what's the thing
that's going to hear that get request
and know what to do API is right like
that that's what we're still building
here but we're adding another layer here
the router the router is going to be the
first thing that hears that request come
through
the router hears that request and they
go hmm
you made a get request on the root route
I know what controller you should go
talk to so the router is really good at
like looking at the URL right the
router's really good at looking at the
URL and when I refresh the page I made a
get request to my server right exactly I
made a get request to my server I made a
get request to my server and the router
was like you know what I know somebody
that can handle that for you right
you're trying to go to the root route
you're trying to make a get request I
know just the person to handle this
request and so there was a Smurf
that was
in charge of hearing any get requests
that are on the default route
right
I'm in charge of hearing any get
requests on the default route so the
router heard the request come through
and said you know what I know who to
talk to go talk to this Smurf their sold
job
is to handle any request that is a get
request on the default route
cool now this Smurf could do a bunch of
stuff
this Smurf could if it needed to use our
model to go and talk to the database
our Smurf could
generate some HTML with our views right
and so if we look at the refreshing of
this page what does this Smurf need to
do
does this Smurf I keep clicking on here
I'm just going to close these
does this Smurf need to talk to our
database at all
I'm just trying to refresh the main page
here right refresh the main page here
does my Smurf need to go talk to the
database
absolutely not there's no data that I'm
pulling from my database that is just
some straight HTML that I need so my
Smurf is going to go directly to My
Views and I'm still using ejs so it's
going to generate some HTML via ejs
right and once it has that HTML my Smurf
and respond back to my client with that
HTML right so the client the user
refresh the page the router was like yo
I know which Smurf is ready to handle
that request there was a Smurf or
controller that was set up to handle get
requests on the main route and that
Smurfs sole job was to just go
and deal with our view engine which in
this case is ejs to get some HTML and
once it has that HTML that Smurf
responded with it
right so
this MVC architecture is going to come
down to a few key pieces the router
hearing the requests coming in
and knowing which controller or Smurf is
set up to handle those requests you can
imagine our application having
a lot of Smurfs all that are set up to
handle different types of requests some
might be set up to hear a get on the
main route some may be set up to hear a
post on the main route some may be set
up to hear a the delete on the
other route right like all these
different Smurfs can be set up to handle
different types of requests that are
coming their way and each Smurf or each
controller gets to decide what it's
going to do right sometimes they're just
going to use our views which in this
case is our ejs to generate and render
out some HTML
sometimes our Smurfs will need to talk
to our models and our models are the
only thing that can talk to our database
let me say it again our model is the
so requests will come in from the client
side to our server
our router will hear those requests
coming in
know which controller to talk to
and sometimes the controller will use
ejs
our view engine sometimes the controller
will talk to the model and the model
will talk to the database right but it's
up to us to code out what the controller
does and the beauty of this right the
beauty of this is if we separate out our
concerns if we have a controller that
has the ability to talk to the Views
that has the ability to talk to our
models and they are all separate that
gives us the ability to do some really
really cool things so right now for my
views I am using ejs it's in the game
what are some other things that we could
use to handle our views
what are some other things we could use
to handle our views
handlebars pug react so let me put some
of these down here handlebars
pug
react
right all these different things can be
written to handle our views
how about our database we're using
mongodb
but what else can we use
what else could we use
sequel right postgres equal whatever
right
everybody has like a really cool one
Maria DB Firebase yeah let's do it on
there Firebase
rear DB couchdb whatever right so we
could use all these different types of
view engines or things to handle our
views whether it's the egest that we're
using handlebars pug react we could use
different types of databases SQL mongodb
Firebase read it because we it doesn't
matter
if we build our application with an MVC
structure does it matter what we use to
render our views
like if we decide to change from ejs
to pug
does any other part of our application
have to change
no
and if we decide to change from
mongodb to SQL to any other part of our
application have to change
no and exactly and that's the beauty of
it if we follow MVC model view
controller and we separate out all of
our concerns we abstract out all of our
concerns right it doesn't matter what we
use to handle our views it doesn't
matter what we use to uh handle our
models like that can talk to our
database we can swap out whatever the
heck we want and our application still
work right so
what I want us to Think Through is all
right
if we're gonna build an application
if we're gonna build an application and
right now our applications use ejs
our applications use mongodb
and
we build out some really good
applications like we build out our to-do
list we build out our Instagram clone we
build out our
um our our a couple big projects that
we'll do as a team
and you have an interview
with a company that uses pug
what do you do over the weekend
learn pug
and then just change the views
right
if you
right if you
are going to apply to a company that
uses postgres right
that uses postgres
you take the weekend you learn enough
postgres and do you have to rebuild an
entire application
you have to rebuild an entire
application no
you just swap out the piece here that
they need to see or you just swap out
the piece here that they need to see
right and so the beauty is if you can
learn MVC if the concepts can make sense
if you understand how to build out this
layer of abstraction you get a whole new
level of flexibility a whole new level
of modularity that serves you so well
going into the hunt so tonight I'm gonna
walk through our to-do list using MVC
with ejs mongodb and Mongoose for
handling our models but know that we
could swap out any of these pieces if
you ever the heck we want and so that's
why I don't think it's worth it to to
over invest in one area we can learn the
core build out a bunch of projects
together that use this core you
understand the core
and then when you have to make these
little changes or tweaks you do it
so we'll start off by building the to-do
list and our Instagram clone using ejs
and then we're going to put this in the
practice because we're going to swap out
our views for react right we'll redo it
with react and then if we have a little
bit of time at the end we'll do it again
but we'll swap out postgres but we're
still reusing the stuff
as needed
cool so that's the goal
the idea of MVC is that it brings this
level of modularity abstraction but once
you understand these Concepts it is a
game changer for your job search right
for the hunt
cool
let's think about
another request here just to think
through it we're gonna we're gonna dig
into some of these Concepts deeper right
we're doing some of these Concepts
deeper don't worry like yeah I don't
really understand what a model is that's
all right we're gonna see that in a bit
all right for now know that the router
is the thing that's listening for the
request
right and the router takes those
requests and knows which controller to
hand that request to
each controller knows what it needs to
do sometimes the controller will go and
talk to our model which can then get
some data from our database
and then once the controller has that
data what it can do is pass that data to
The View
The View can use that data to help build
out
the HTML and then the controller can
send that HTML back to the client so a
lot of times the controller is talking
to a model getting some data then
passing that data to the view so we can
build out the HTML once it has that file
it can respond back to the browser
will there be more than one controller
yes every big thing that we have to do
will be handled by a different
controller so you can think about every
single request that we make to our
server having its own controller so
right now
when we refreshed our page we made a
request right we made a request and our
router heard that request and knew what
controller to go talk to all right when
we are on our to-do list there are so
many other requests that can be made one
we just made a get request by loading
this page we can delete stuff we can
post stuff we can
um update stuff all of which are
requests all of which are going to have
their own controllers
now once we understand that everything's
going to have like its own controller we
can also start organizing our
controllers so I'm going to have a bunch
of controllers just for my to-do list
the controllers that handle the creating
the reading the updating deleting but I
also might have controllers that just
handle like the home page and like the
basic HTML stuff right so we're going to
see that in our code today that yes
there's so many different controllers
that we're going to have we can also
organize those controllers based on the
different parts of our apps so I'm going
to have like my home controllers and I'm
going to have my to do controllers and
uh connecting all those pieces is what
we're going to work on
dumpster death so the controllers akin
to each API logic yeah it's starting to
the controller is the thing that can be
our API and know what it needs to do
does it need to go talk to our views
does it need to go talk to our models
which can talk to our database the
controller we write to know what to do
for each of those scenarios for each of
those requests
we used to know HTML exactly we used to
not know HTML exactly y'all have come so
far like I said there's this is a this
is a big topic there's a lot of little
pieces we have to connect and so what I
want you to do is just realize all right
right these are Legos we're learning how
to put all these different Legos
together that's okay if it feels a
little overwhelming at first we're gonna
walk through it step by step to see how
it all comes through
uh what's the point of the router uh the
routers just so that we can organize all
the different requests that are coming
in there's a lot of different requests
that are coming in and we want to be
able to pass those requests off to
individual controller so some people put
the controllers able to hear the
requests I like one more level of
abstraction
um because what will often happen is I
want to be able to think about all the
requests that are coming in
independent of what needs to happen when
that request comes in right like like
hearing the request and knowing what to
do are two different bits in my mind
right so the router is an actual router
exactly it just routes that request to
the right controller
does it matter which browser the client
uses no it doesn't matter which browser
the client uses because it's always the
same kind of request when I refresh this
page I have made a get request on my
root route
does it matter if that request came from
Firefox Safari Chrome it doesn't matter
it's still the same kind of request
so these requests are coming from the
client side and those requests are
making it to our server
all right are making it to our server
the first thing that's going to hear
that request is the router and the
router knows which Smurf which middle
person to hand that request off to
right
cool so MVC is server side then yes this
is all about organizing our server side
that's all this is It's just adding a
level of organization to our server-side
code so that we can work more
efficiently as a team know where to go
to fix bugs when they happen and to add
a level of modularity so that if we get
discussed with EGS we can switch to
something else and the rest of our code
base still works
all right
how many routers can a major site have a
lot like a lot a lot
um there was this
um
hold on real quick I'll show you this
it's called hackathon
starter kit I believe it was called
and
the cool thing about the hackathon
starter kit
was that it had like a really good
um it was like a really good boilerplate
for starting an application like if
you're going to a hackathon I just had
everything already done for you and so
let me just show you this real quick
because they've thought through it
um so here is their router
and controllers all on one page because
you got to think about it
every single request
every single request needs to have its
own like it we hear the request and then
what controller do we use here's the
request what controller do we use right
here's the request here's the controller
that we use right and so think about all
the things you can do on a normal web
application right we can go to the main
page we can log in we can log out we can
reset sign up log in right all these
different routes that we're listening
for and all the different controllers
that we're using controller
that's gonna happen a lot and then look
even for our API like all the different
routes for our different apis that we
could use right like it just it just can
be really it can be overwhelming I think
this looks really beautiful and elegant
but that's kind of what we're getting
ourselves into I'm not going to start
you with that we're gonna have some
really simple code to look at that's a
little overwhelming right but that's the
idea every single request that can be
made in our application every single
request right it needs to be heard by
the router and passed off to the right
controller right and then those
controllers know what to do that's the
API code that we're writing right knows
the weather to just hand stuff straight
off to ejs and render the view or to
talk to our model which can then talk to
the database and all that fun stuff
cool now
we are
today going to see high level right this
is a really meaty topic there's a lot
for me to show you there's a lot for us
to discuss like I said we're going to
come back Sunday and see it all again
there's a lot of big words a lot of big
terms that I'm not going to use tonight
I'm gonna skip them and the reason why I
want to skip those big terms is not to
confuse you right to not overwhelming a
lot of folks but because I also want you
to do something for homework
for homework I want you right I want you
to build a lecture on MVC
so we've already talked a lot about MVC
model view controller I want you to
build a lecture slides if you had to
explain what MVC was to someone else and
you had to do it lecture style like I do
for you each each and every single night
I want you to walk through it now the
reason why I asked you to do that is
because this is such a fundamental part
of the rest of program and the rest of
your career as a software engineer that
I really want you to nerd out over some
of the details to really understand what
a model is to really understand what
views are to really understand what a
controller is and one of the best ways
to really understand something is to
teach it to someone else so to get that
into our brain right to get that into
our brain I need you to build an MVC
lecture so that's what you're going to
be doing so hopefully you're taking some
some some questions tonight right
hopefully you are
uh going to internalize some of this but
the idea is to take what we learned
tonight and build a lecture to help make
it stick in your brain to be able to
explain it to someone else that'll walk
through it so at some points I'm going
to give you a a
cheeky smile
that's on you that's your job right
because I'm gonna skip over a couple big
things right that I want you to figure
out a way to define and explain on your
own in your lecture now
uh I'm a terrible teacher though no
you're not because here's the thing
everyone explains stuff differently
right everyone explains things
differently
and you have to find your voice in
explaining things because guess what
you're gonna have to do on the job
on the job you're gonna have to explain
your code
and one of the hardest things we can do
one of the hardest things we have to do
is get used to explaining things and
coming to those conclusions on our own
right and so we're going to cover a lot
of stuff tonight
I need you to not really like
to to lean on yourself
right
right to lean on yourself tonight
tomorrow into Thursday to figure out how
to explain these things in your own
voice right
to in your own voice is the is is the
really important bit here not on me not
on somebody else but to really
internalize all right
MVC something really important I need to
explain this to other stakeholders I
need to explain this to other
individuals how can I do that right we
have to start practicing this right
we have to start practicing this it's
something that you have to get better at
it's something that you have to start
doing and so tonight after we end
I'm going to ask you to build out this
lecture so you can get used to
explaining things now the easy thing to
do would be to run off right and watch a
bunch of videos and then just copy what
they say right now I'm not saying don't
watch the videos I'm not saying don't
consume other content but it has to come
from you your own voice right and so
with this
hard topic with this difficult topic
practice explaining it to someone else
right in your own voice on your own
there's a few things where I say you
have to work on it on your own don't
work with others on this thing take the
time push yourself understand it but we
got plenty of stuff to cover tonight
we're gonna walk through MVC plenty of
times you're gonna see the code we're
going to see it in action and on Sunday
we're going to walk through it again
but know that your work is to build a
lecture explaining it to others
cool now
I'm going to ask for these slides I
think I said Thursday but I'll I'll
actually ask for them on Tuesday so I'll
give you a week to work on this uh and
then I'll collect all the different
um
I'll collect all your different your
different lectures right I'll ask for
you to submit your lecture and then from
these lectures I'll randomly pick one
and as long as it's good as long as you
put effort into it right as long as you
put time and energy into it and it was
good uh that person that wins I will
personally help you on the hunt so I'm
gonna help you find the companies you
should apply to I'm going to work
through your story I'm going to work
through your resume your portfolio I'm
going to work through your 100 hours
project we're gonna spend a significant
amount of time making sure that you're
set up a hundred percent for the hunt so
there's there's a pretty big incentive
on the line uh for getting this lecture
done so
trust me on this
it's one of those things that seems like
an odd request but please trust me that
you want to do this exercise it will
help you not only understand MVC but get
you used to something that you're gonna
have to do on the job
a lot of times especially as entry level
Engineers you get assign a ticket
something you have to do you do it and
then at the end of the day you have to
say what you did at the end of the week
during your retrospective to say what
you built you have to get used to like
learning quickly understanding complex
stuff and then communicating that to
others it's an invaluable skill that's
going to help your first 30 days 90 days
on the job right it's huge you have to
do it
cool
alrighty so let's go ahead and we're at
the top of the hour so we're going to
take our break uh when we come back from
break we're going to talk through MVC
again we're going to see code so we can
start to see like all right you're
talking about routers you're talking
about Smurfs I I need to see it when we
come back I'm going to show it to you
we're going to walk through it so you
can see what's actually happening in our
code base if you need to code
exclamation point Discord and the
follow-on materials there is uh the code
all right folks let's put five minutes
on the clock uh should we include a
script with the slides that's up to you
depends on how deep you want to go into
it
all right depends on how deep you want
to go into it
but I think the more you put into these
kind of some folks see them as silly but
I've
I'm telling you the folks that put time
into this assignment they just they just
it just clicks more than it does with
others right
um so it's up to you the length it's up
to you how much effort you want to put
into it but how could you convey MVC to
someone else right that's the goal
all right folks come on back uh somebody
redeem two more minutes but we'll apply
that to the next one because the timer
had already started lost it I can't wait
to see these I know I'm excited
cool
all right
so
we we talked a lot about this idea of
different requests coming in so I am
going to talk through the first request
that is coming in we're going to see all
the pieces and then we'll come back to
our lovely MVC uh to see if it makes
sense to us let's see if we are what
what actually happened here how did it
work how did it work right so let's
let's talk through what happens here
when I refresh the page here I have made
a git request a get request all right so
if we look at our code base we have a
lot of new code here there's lots of new
files and folders lots of bits and Bobs
here that we're gonna have to talk
through but before I go through all
these individual pieces let's just let's
see if we can follow through what just
happened there so what we know with MVC
is that we refresh the page what type of
request did we just make and what was
the route what type of request did we
make and what was the route
yeah it was a give request and it was on
the home route now let me show you a
Nifty line of code
look at this line of code right here
app.use
forward slash home routes
so right here you can see I'm setting up
my code to have two base routes
either the default kind of like root
route route in which case I would use
all of my home routes
and I have my slash to Do's right so
without even having to look at the rest
of my application right we we can we can
we can look into the future here right
we know that all of my like root routes
will probably be in home routes and
anything to do with my to-do list will
probably have the slash to Do's route in
it right so they're two different URLs
when I say you're out we don't have to
get twisted here I I mean the URL like
if we look at the URL here we can see
that I am on localhost 2121 right
21 21 21 21 21
and that would be the root route or the
default
however when I click over to my to-do
list look how the route changes now we
are on slash to Do's they are two
different routes two different URLs that
are going to help us as we build out
this project
right so
we refresh the page and we made a
request on the default route
since I am on the default route the
router I am going to use is called home
routes now all the stuff I am about to
show you I gotta get big for this
all the stuff I am about to show you you
already know
I am showing you variables I am showing
you objects and that's about and maybe a
function and that's it right and so yes
there's layers yes there's Legos that we
have to do but these layers are
important because it gives us structure
organization and the modularity to our
code so it seems like we're doing some
extra skips and jumps but those extra
skips and jumps enable us to break up
our code into different pieces right and
then we can all work on those pieces
individually and when we have a problem
or a bug we go straight to those pieces
and we're not dealing with one giant
massive file so when I see
history
when
all right Siri
you're trying to get me going I'm taking
this off
I gotta switch that all right here we go
when that get request comes in right
when that get request comes in on that
default route I'm going to use home
routes now
what is home routes without looking
anywhere else in my code what the heck
is Home Route just look at it what is it
don't overthink it what is home routes
it's a variable it's a variable home
routes is a variable and that variable
is holding something right
we don't know what it's holding yet but
it's just a variable that's holding
something so let's go ahead and look at
this home home routes home routes
variable if we look up here
home
routes equals require route slash home
hmm
so we have this ability to require
right we have this ability to require
and what we have to do is we have to
chase down this path so I have to go
look in my routes folder
and then I have to find home
so to to figure out what Home Route is
going to hold right to figure out what
it's going to hold I have to chase this
down so over here I have my routes
folder and then I have home you can see
my home.js here
cool so let's click on that
inside my home JS you can see that it
exports this router right it exports
this router so what's happening is the
stuff that is here
is being exported it's being spit out
right it's being spit out so when I see
this require here routes home what I am
really doing is I am catching what was
spit out of that home.js file and this
is what was spit out so it was really
just a fancy way right it's just a
really fancy way of running the code
that's in this file
that's all it is it's just a really
fancy way of running the code that's in
this file so
when we refresh the page like an import
exactly exactly exactly so when we
refresh the page right we refresh the
page that sent a get request on the root
route
all right let's take a look
root route
use home routes all right to know what
home routes does we have to come up here
and we require
go into the routes fighter folder find
home right whatever gets spit out is
what's going to go here
right
is gonna go here
is gonna go here now
when we look at it there's not too much
going on here
but there is one thing that's happening
what type of request did we make again
right
what type of request do we make again
when we refresh the page
all right so it was a get request
on the main route
and what does the router do the router
does what the router goes and gets the
what
the router goes and hands off the
request to the what
the controller that's right here
right it hands off that request to the
controller that's right here so our
controller is right here right
laughs
nasty redeemed a spicy rant on the topic
of their choice
uh
nasty what is your what is the topic of
your choice
that was a hundred thousand Channel
points
I'm keeping an eye out for your response
you got to give me a response or I'm
Gonna Keep I'm gonna keep going
what's the topic of your choice
I see them uh
they see them post it
scam thank you for the posture check
first try
slow mode yeah
no it was a hundred thousand Channel
points which you get by just being here
all right actually I'm Gonna Keep moving
on I don't see her I don't see your
response
um so if you uh send me a a message
we'll do it uh next stream
maybe they accidentally hit it that
would suck all right I'm Gonna Keep go
it was a mistake
oh no
it was a mistake no there's no way for
me for me to give you the points back
like I don't have the ability to do that
that's a twitch thing
but uh we'll make it right send me a
send me a message on Twitch we'll figure
out something else if you want to use
your points for something else uh send
me uh send me a a mod mail send me a mod
mail and Discord and we'll figure out
what you need
all right
foreign
let's get back to what we were doing
sorry
that sucks I'm sorry
all right let's take a peek
we refresh the page
right
you got got
that made a get request
all right we made a get request
right
if we look at our server.js file
we set it up so that all of the root
route requests use the home routes file
so home routes was telling us to go into
the routes folder find home that's what
we did and boom here is the router for
the home routes all right so now we
gotta check the the the the the create
read post delete right was it a git a
post a put or a delete it was a get on
that root route so here is the
controller that I want you to use
right now we could look at the to-do's
router look at this to-do's router
the to-do's router is going to have a
lot more stuff that can happen right if
we look at the to-do's router
we can see the default route we can see
that we want to create a to-do for like
the post a put
to Market complete put the market
incomplete a delete request to delete
the to do right so the router for the
to-do's has a lot more work to do right
whereas the router for the home well
there's really like only
one type of request here right there's
really only one type of request here
that can happen and that's that that get
request so our router is really not
doing too much heavy lifting now
somebody asked Leon why don't you just
keep the routers here in the server.js
uh and that's because I want my
server.js to be separate from my router
all right my server.js can sometimes get
pretty bloated there's a lot of stuff I
need for like configuring the server so
I rather have my router be a separate
piece right and a lot of times I wind up
having my router
um handle all these different pieces of
my project and so I like to have them
separate now some folks will keep them
all together some folks will separate
them out I find when I separate it out
it does help me debug a little bit
faster and know exactly where I'm going
I also want folks to be able to look at
my code and really have a good idea of
what's happening just by looking at the
code
right
cool
all right
so we had that get request come in home
wrote home routes why can't I say after
I say home
routes right which we required
is set up to use this home controller
now it's the same thing right it's the
same thing this type of require syntax
we're going to see over and over again
so for home controller to do its thing
it had to go to our controllers and find
home right so if we look I have a
controllers folder right and inside of
that is our home controller
if we look at our home controller it
exports a what
now don't worry about this I know we're
jumping into this a little bit but what
is this file export
it exports an object it's an object so
that makes git index a what well who
remembers
who remembers
yeah that makes git index a method right
it's a method and the reason we know
it's a method is because it's tied to a
function right so here is a function
right it's a function and a function
that's part of an object we call a
method right it's a function that's part
of the object so we call it a method
right key value pair two that is true
yep and so git index is a method because
it's tied to this function
and what the heck right
what the heck does this function do
yeah it renders out our
index.ejs right it renders out our
index.hs so let's let's walk through all
of this all right
we refresh the page
when I refresh the page what has my
client done my client has refreshed the
page so that has made a what when the
client refreshes the page from their
client-side device they have made a what
they have made a get request exactly a
get request
that get request makes its way to our
server
and the first thing that we set up on
our server is a router that hears that
request
and our router
knows what controller to go talk to so
we have a controller called our home
controller
and the router says hey
go talk to the home controller
right go talk to the home controller
all right and the home controller is
like all right well
I can do some stuff
what do you want me to do well in this
instance since we have made a
get request
on the default route
what I want you to do right what I want
you to do is to go
and render out some ejs take your ejs
right take your ejs
bit out some HTML
and then I want you to respond with that
HTML back to the client so my user all
they did was refresh the page when they
refresh the page right when they refresh
the page that made a request to our
router
our router the sole job of the router is
to know which controller to hand that
request off to because we could have so
many different kind of requests gets
puts push posts deletes whatever it
doesn't matter right so many different
kinds of requests that could be passed
through
and the router knows what controller is
in charge
of handling that request
right so it hands the route that request
off to the controller the controller is
like oh I hear that request all right
since I hear that request I know what to
do I'm gonna go to My Views and I'm
gonna ask the views to render out some
ejs
and when it renders out the ejs that's
going to give us some HTML
and then the controller is going to
respond with that HTML back to the
client so request comes in
the request is passed to the controller
from the router the controller says all
right I know what to do in this instance
let's go to our ejs spit out some ejs
get that HTML and respond back to the
client
right
so a lot of steps are happening here
right a lot of steps are happening here
right
what if a router doesn't have a
particular method or controller set up
uh then it wouldn't work right like if
it doesn't if the router doesn't have to
handle that control like it doesn't know
what controller to hand it off to then
maybe nothing would happen
eventually we'll have like a 404 for
everything yeah so if the router doesn't
have a controller to pass stuff off to
it'll have a 404 controller and the sole
job of the 404 controller will be to
serve up the 404 page that would be it
does MVC affect the user experience is
it any slower than how we're doing it
I mean if we think about it like at like
a an actual like what's happening in the
Machinery type of thing then yes there
has to be some sort of delay it will
ever be like we're talking about speed
of light here right so will the user
ever really notice it no
yeah Larry thank you for the hydration
cheers to you
well
can you show us where the routers are I
can
cool so I refreshed the page boom
refresh the page
the very first thing that here is that
refresh is all right what route was I on
I was on the default route right I was
on the root route right I was on the
root route since I was on the root route
I'm going to use my home routes my home
routers my router file is going to
handle all the routes that are possible
with this root route
all right so let's go take a look at
that file
all right
what type of request was made oh it was
a get request on the root route I know
what to do I know what to do it was a
get request on the root route I know to
use the home controller
and
and not only do I know to use the home
controller I know what method to use and
that method is get index
right is git index so if we look at the
home controller we can see the get index
method does what
the git index method does what look if
we look at the Home Route it said go to
the home controller and use the get
index method home controller get index
method home controller get index method
what does this function do
it renders out the ejs
and when it's done rendering out the ejs
it responds remember that res is short
for response right short for response we
respond with that ejs
right so there's a couple levels here
the server set up to hear the request
all right it was a root route so we go
to our home routes all right it was a
get request on the Home Route so it's a
get request on the Home Route we'll use
the home controller and we'll use this
method to get indexed
cool
now we'll notice in the home controller
it renders out index.ejs
what the heck is
index.ejs what part of this MVC is it
it's our views exactly our controller
because right now we're looking at the
home controller our home controller
knows how to hand off the ejs rendering
to our views right so that request came
in and we can see the controllers doing
the work the controller knows what to do
the controller knows to render out the
ejs
cool
and so that's just a really simple one
right this is like this this is as
simple as we can get where we we hit
enter or we refresh that is a get
request on a root route that get request
comes in
the server knows to use our home routes
we know from the home routes that since
it was a get on the root route we're
going to use the home controller and
specifically the git index method from
that controller that controller goes and
talks to the Views which is our ejs it
renders out the HTML from that ejs
template and responds now the cool thing
is we can we can go over here and we can
look at
our views and we'll see that there's an
index.ejs in the views and there's a
to-do's.ejs in the in the in the views
so our actual ejs templates are
separated out into their own views
folder as well
what does modules dot exports do
remember the way we're linking all this
stuff together
right the way that we are linking all
this stuff together it seems kind of
wild at first right that we're jumping
from folder to folder to folder how are
we jumping right how are we jumping from
folder to folder to folder well it's
because we are calling something right
we are calling something and when we
call it it spits something out
right so let's imagine
we're going back to back in the day we
were little kids we were playing on the
block by ourselves well uh sorry we'll
let something slip about myself we were
playing with lots of friends outside
right we were playing with lots of
friends outside and mom or dad came to
the door and said hey Leon come home
right
hey Leon come home
and I would come running
right
I would come running back home
right the same thing is happening here
with
modules.exports somebody is making a
call
and then for this to work this file has
to spit something out to answer that
call
right so the way that we're connecting
all these files together is one file is
making a call
and the other file is spitting something
out to answer that call
right now what we're seeing here is that
a lot of times we're spitting out an
object
or eventually we'll also see that we're
spitting out functions or we're spitting
out
um
very simple things that are built into
Express right
and so this idea of calling and spitting
out is not using anything new we're
using the same structures that we've
been using since the beginning of
JavaScript we're using objects and
functions and so to separate stuff out
into individual files we still need a
structure for the stuff that's in those
individual files and so we're not going
to make something else up we're going to
use the structures that we're already
comfortable with in JavaScript so we'll
use functions and we'll use objects and
we can spit things out of files as an
object or as a function and so if we
look
and we're saying all right
we're on the server.js we're running
home routes home routes is being
required that's like Mom or Dad yelling
for you to come home right it's yelling
for you to come home and you need a
response so we have to go look at this
route's folder the home file to find
that response and we can see it spit out
the router
right
Express is doing some routing for us and
it's spitting out that whole router for
us so the response the response to this
call right the response to this call is
what is spit out here which in this case
is just all the stuff we see right here
right so you're asking for something and
something is being spit out to answer
that request
same thing's Happening Here
we're saying home controller all right
well here's home controller it's
requiring it's making a request for
something right it's making a request
for something and I don't even have to
go and look to see what it responds with
right
I don't even have to I don't even have
to look to see what it responds with
because look at this
what is this right here
that dot notation
what's the only thing that we know can
use dot notation what's the only thing
we've used so far that uses that dot
notation
objects objects are the only thing that
use that notation so I am requiring I am
asking for something I am asking
something from this controllers folder
I'm asking for something from that home
file I'm asking for something to come
here and I can just take a peek and see
oh I know it has to be an object an
object is going to be plopped in here
like that
right and I'll just be plopped in there
just like that and so if we go and
actually look at the home controller so
I go to my controllers folder I go to
the home.js we can just say all right it
spits out this object let me grab this
whole object here copy
paste
that's all we did
right
we went to that file we went into that
folder we went to that file and we
grabbed that object
right
we grabbed that object
and now that object
is there for us to use
and we can use it so if home controller
is now this object it has a git index
method so when I do home controller dot
get index I'm using this object I'm
using this get index method and what I'm
really doing is just running this
function
all right I'm just running this function
nothing has thing has changed though
nothing has changed and so a lot of
folks get they they get confused at this
point and that's okay I know it's a lot
to come at you at one time if the if
especially if you haven't done the
homework if you haven't done the reading
if you haven't done the videos right
um if you haven't done any of that this
could be really overwhelming right
um
everything I'm showing you is just
organization
that's all it is I'm just showing you
right
you've already done this you've already
set up a get request right you've
already set up a get request that that
goes and and renders out some ejs
right
right you've already done that all we're
doing is we're adding some layers to
what we've already done so that when we
want to make changes we can
right when we want to make changes we
can so if I want it
a different
I wanted a different
I wanted a different let's say
let's say I don't want
this page to render for the home page
right
I don't want this page to render on the
home page
right what could I do I don't want
create a to-do list I want some other I
want some other some other file to to
change
right
I could
simply create a new view
a new ejs file if I want it to
right
a new ejs file if I wanted to and then
all I have to do is know all right
what's handling what's handling my get
request on the default route right like
pretend we are a brand new I'm going to
get big for a second
Pretend We're a brand new engineer to
this project right we're a brand new
engineer to this project and the very
first thing I am tasked with is
modifying the home page
right I want to make some changes to the
home page right
so
I have to figure out how to make changes
to that home page
what I'm going to do is just look at my
code all right let's start
home page is the default route
so I'm going to use home routes
where the heck is home routes okay I go
to my routes folder and there is a home
file
so I go to my routes folder
home file all right so now I'm in my my
home file
and I realize that when I'm loading that
home page right that main page on the
root route
that is a get request so all right
here's my get request it's on the root
route what happens when I load that page
well I'm using the home controller and
I'm calling the git index
probably a method on that home
controller so let me go and find the
Home controller all right so I gotta go
to my controllers folder I'm going to
look for the home file in that
controllers folder
controllers folder home file and here we
go all right
I am going to wind up rendering out the
index.ejs which is part of my views so
if I want to change the home
page I know to change the index.ejs so I
know that's going to be in My Views so I
go to My Views and here's my index.ejs
now the index.ejs right the index.egs is
very very simple
I could put all my changes in here so I
can say instead of create I want to say
make a to-do list
right make a to-do list right and when I
go back and I refresh my page now it
says make a to-do list
I was able to step through all of my
code right
I'm going to step through all of my code
right because I understand that a
request is coming in
let me hand it off to my router the
router is going to hand it off to a
controller and if I find that controller
right if I find the controller I can see
what it's doing what ejs files is it
using what view template is it using you
can see all of that inside of the
controller
and then I can make the change that I
want to make and the Beautiful Thing
the beautiful thing is instead of when I
make this change
am I worried about anything else
breaking
breaking no
the funny thing is I could go back to
like my home controller I could change
out this file entirely to be something
completely different and nothing else
would ever break or I don't have to
worry about it so now as a team
we can make all the changes we want to
the Views and know that something else
isn't breaking somewhere else
right and so that's kind of what we're
getting here there's lots of little
layers here right
right lots of little layers here what
we're doing is separating stuff out and
I actually think the the home page route
is a little harder to understand right
because there's only one thing happening
there's only one thing happening but
stay with me stay with me
let's take a look
at the to-do list now
I'm going to click this anchor tag
right I'm going to click this anchor tag
if we use the inspector
right if we use the inspector we can see
that this anchor tag is taking us where
where is this anchor tag taking us
to the to Do's route so slash to Do's
let's click on it boom slash to Do's we
can even see that my URL now has slash
to Do's in it
what
heard that request
what's the thing that heard that request
the to-do's request the router exactly
the router heard the to-do's request and
the router's job is to hand that request
off to the appropriate what
the appropriate controller I think there
might be some learning happening I don't
I don't know if I don't know if you all
feel it but I feel like there's maybe a
little bit of learning happening here
don't worry if the jumping doesn't make
sense I feel a little bit of learning
happening though let's let's hang on
here all right let's hang on here
all right so
we went to slash to do's
that request came through
right the job of the router is to hand
off
that to Do's request to the appropriate
controller so let's take a look at our
code all right
started our server.js now was the route
the root route or was it the to-do's
route
it was the to-do's route so which
route file are we going to use we're
going to use the home routes are we
going to use the to-do's routes
we're going to use the tuners routes
right look slash to do we use the to-do
route so where do I find the to-do's
routes I have to go to my routes folder
and look at the to-do's file so it's
going to do that all right here's my
routes folder and here's my to-do's file
boom
here are all my routes for the to Do's
route now the beautiful thing is since I
am and people ask like Leon why do I
separate this out into separate files
well now that I'm in the to do's
now I'm in the to-do's router I don't
have to do what over and over again
since I'm in the to-do's router I don't
have to do this
ah misspelled it that would have been a
problem right I don't have to do that
right
how wet exactly I don't have to do that
because I've already said
I've already said I'm in the to-do's
route
right I'm already in the to-do's route
so I'm already there right
I'm already there I don't have to worry
about it I don't have to worry about it
great so
this was a get request
right I'm on slash to Do's this was a
get request on which route inside of
to-do's
which route am I at inside of to-do this
is a tricky question which route am I on
inside of to do's
you ready yeah the root exactly so I'm
I'm here
right that's where I'm at I'm at to do's
forward slash
the root route route on to deuce and
what type of request was this
this was a get request okay this was a
get request so let's go back take a look
at our code do we have
the appropriate router for a get request
on the root route of to-do's
we do line five exactly right give me
the root get on the root route we're
already inside a to-do's right we're
already inside to Do's root route right
root route route inside of to-do's we're
already there and so when we hear that
get request on the root route of to-do's
what controller are we going to use are
we going to use our homes controller
now we're going to use our to-do's
controller which is a whole separate
controller that just handles our to-do's
and what method are we going to use on
that to Do's controller well it's get to
do so where the heck can I find my
to-do's controller well I got to go to
my controllers folder and find the
to-do's controller file so controllers
folder to Do's JS and then here is my
get to do's
function
here it is and what is this doing
what does this get to Do's function
doing
well
it's going to go and find all of our
documents
in our
database
it's going to actually count all of the
documents that are still left to be done
and then it's going to pass all those
documents into our to Do's ejs file
to uh render out the HTML
but
we're missing some code here
let's let's go look at our old code
actually let's look at our old code
uh GitHub
look at our old oh look at that handsome
fellow
let's go to 100 devs repo
there are repositories
all right uh where's our to-do
I was doing a different was it it was
not in the in the um
oh here we go to-do list expresses the
very first one all right
so
something interesting about the code
before
right before we had this uh
go to the database
all right let's make this bigger
find the to-do's collection
all right go to the database
find the to-do's collection find all the
documents in the collection
and turn it into an array
right
go to the database find the to-do's
collection find all the documents yet
that's not here just says to do
what the heck is to do
why is it why isn't it going to the
database why is it finding all the the
right collection why isn't it finding
all the documents
oh to do is our model
should the code that knows how to talk
to our database be here
no we want to separate that out into our
model right so if we're looking at our
original photo here right the controller
knows how to talk to the Views and knows
how to talk to the model but the model
is the thing that actually knows what to
do and talk to the database and all that
fun stuff
right so
instead of having that all jumbled here
inside the controller we'll just use the
controller of to do
right the troller can do and then we'll
separate all the stuff that the database
needs into that to do model
right so we'll separate that so instead
of having it all hard coded in here
right we could hand that off to the
model
cool so
let's walk through what happened there
again just so we can see it
we
got sent to this to Do's page so if we
actually step through our code
server just said all right you went to
slash to Do's let's use the to-do routes
we looked at our to do routes all right
we wanted the get on the root of to Do's
so we were at to Do's forward slash so
we're going to use the to Do's
controller
and what we're really trying to do is
when we go look at this to-do's
controller and we look at the get to
Do's what we're really trying to do with
get to Do's is show the freaking to Do's
on the page right we're trying to show
this first try right that's the actual
to do but to actually get that data our
data is stored in our database so we're
gonna have to use the model to get that
data
right
it is part of it yeah
so when we come back from our break
we will use that model to talk to the
database to get stuff from the database
right
all right they get stuff from the
database and then be able to show it and
render it to our users
cool all right that's a real knock so
I'm gonna take the break seven minutes
on the clock because we had the uh the
bonus from before and I will see you all
very soon we let me show the music here
we had a wonderful
raffle today in the newsletter so if you
haven't opened the newsletter what are
you doing folks
newsletter always has the coolest stuff
dopest stuff first stuff and uh
we will be having a a lot of surprises
inside the newsletter going forward
um especially to get the end of program
lots of cool things to to raffle off and
stuff like that
I am going to throw twitch names into
our name picker I did the mistake the
last two times of doing Discord names so
now I have to go back through and
connect Discord to Twitch to send you a
message on Twitch so I will do that
today so every uh all nine folks that
win the raffle uh will get a message
from me today uh with the uh link to set
up a coffee chat really looking forward
to talking to some of you so let's go do
name picker here
and then this is kind of like my trial
run
um for for the coffee chats and uh if it
goes well we'll do a lot more because
one of my favorite things of last cohort
all right so let's go and pick three
and this will be for a coffee chat uh so
let's go ahead and
pick it three two one
all right here we go
octopus Ridge Ryan Hawkins and Shelby 55
uh looking forward to talking to all
three of you
all right I think we've talked before
haven't we I'm not sure but if not it'd
be great to finally talk to you
um congrats to all three of y'all I'm
gonna put you over with my list here uh
you'll get a message from me later today
um with the link and we'll set up a
coffee chat uh for either late this week
or early next week
cool
alrighty so we were at the to do
right we were at the to do
and so we are using if we look to do
right to do was simply another variable
right it was another variable and that
variable was requiring our models so we
had to go to our models right we're
going to go to our models folder which
we have
let me just kind of make a little bit
easier by collapsing some of this go to
our models folder and then find the to
do we only have one model
uh and that to do is using something
called mongoose
so before with with our mongodb we were
using the client right
I'm interested in using the client
before now we're using something called
mongoose
what the heck is mongoose
I look forward to learning more about
what the heck Mongoose is in your MVC
lecture thank you
thank you
but for now it's going to be the it's
kind of like the the the missing
web development Wu-Tang member right odm
ROM whatever you want to call it right
it's it's the missing member and so
Mongoose for now is just going to help
us talk to our database and you will
discover the merry wonders as you build
out your MVC lecture as well now for now
let's just understand Mongoose is
helping us talk to our database and is
handling all the stuff that we need to
be actually be able to talk to our
mongodb database and
we have this wonderful thing that it's
exporting which is the actual model and
the ability for us to talk to that model
that part of the database and Mongoose
is handling all the connection the
actual the actual connection uh is over
here with this connect to B function the
connect DB function is part of our
lovely uh config and all that fun stuff
we'll get to that later don't worry
about that for right now but there's a
lot of stuff going on here that just
makes it work for now let's just
understand that it's how we talk to our
wonderful
wonderful database okay now
eventually
as we start to build out our databases
we are using mongodb to start
and mongodb right
mongodb is a wonderful database but it
is very loose it it doesn't really
matter what you try to put into it it
will accept it so what would be one of
the problems of using mongodb going
forward like what would be a problem of
using mongodb
I like the yeah I like that word
consistency
consistency could be a problem
especially if we're working with other
Engineers if we go back and look at our
old code
like if we look at our to-do Express
right and we look at our specifically
our post
we had this lovely insert one and the
structure for what we inserted was kind
of like in line with the code
right kind of like in line with the code
now
any developer could have came along here
and changed this and in fact somewhere
somewhere else in the code base might
try putting a to do into the database
with a different structure right and
mongodb would be totally fine with this
and we could run into some real trouble
where if we're working with other
Engineers we really haven't agreed upon
what's going into the database how it is
structured and so one of the really cool
things that we get when we start working
with uh Mongoose are schemas right and
so here we have a schema which
well
I look forward to your lecture on MVC
explaining what a schema is but for now
for now we can think of it's kind of
just like the structure
the structure of what we are using
inside of our mongodb database
right so when I am creating to do's
well there was some data that was
associated with those to Do's right
there was a an actual to do which is
like the text of the to do we're telling
it's going to be a string and we are
telling it that it is going to also have
a completed property which is a Boolean
now
one of the things you might have noticed
about
this project somebody said a schema like
a template yeah it's like a template for
what goes into right it is like a
template for what winds up going into
our database
a blueprint exactly exactly cool now we
have this lovely structure
right this lovely structure of what's
now going into rdb
[Music]
right
and with this lovely structure we also
have the ability to know what's going on
maybe without direct access to our
database right now do you all have
access to my database
no put up in different
no so if I wanted you to work on this
application right if I want you to be
able to work on this application maybe
you're a developer on a team that hasn't
given you full access to the actual kind
of mongodb instance
how could you write code
that interacts with the database without
access
to the database
if I wanted you to extend right I wanted
you to extend this project this
application how would you know what
what's actually going on how would you
know what data makes it into the
database how it's structured what the
properties would be
right
what do we do how how can we how can we
do that
yeah
we could look at our model right we
could look at our model and we could
look at the schema that that model
provides and so if I was a new developer
on this project right and I noticed that
we were building a to-do list I don't
actually need access to the database to
know exactly what's going into that
database I can go and just look at my
model
right
I can go and just look at my model
and as a developer I know okay well the
data is going into our database there's
this to do
model and it is
going to have a all the documents are
going to have a to-do property and a
completed property uh the to do property
will be a string and the completed
property will be a Boolean so even
without access right even without access
to the database even without access to
the mongodb instance I know exactly
what's going into my database and all
the other developers can always just
take a quick look and understand what's
the heck's going on so as we build out
this application and it gets more and
more complex we know exactly what kind
of data we're dealing with should we
actually need it
cool
Let's uh let's try walking through
actually using all of this so
all right let's do second try
submit all right so now we have second
try
all right
second try what type of request did I
just make
chat what type of request did I just
make
a post request
what route was that post request on
it was a post request what was the route
it's on the to-do's route let's take a
look at the inspector too
if we look at the inspector
we can see that the action
is to Do's create to do
look at the action and there's there's
other ways to like not have to hard code
it in the action this is just I think a
little easier to read and understand so
that's why I did it but if we look at
the action it's to Do's create to do
so the route is
to do's
cool let's look at our code
let's look at our server.js is it the
root route that post request or is it
the to-do's route for that post request
it's to Do's all right let's look at the
to-do routes
all right let's look at the to-do routes
all right where do we find the two
routes we have to go to the routes
folder and find the to-do's file all
right so I'll go to my
my routes folder
to Do's route file there and it was a
post request so do I have the ability to
handle a post request yes I do right
here and let's look at the last bit of
the action we already know that we're in
to Do's right because we just clicked
through we know we're in to Do's but the
last part of that route was create to do
because if there are multiple forms
right if there are multiple forms of
multiple different types of posts we
might have different actions but we knew
that we were on the to-do's route we
know we're on the create to do and it
was a post all right our router is set
up to listen for that post on the create
create to-do route and it knows to use
this create to sorry this to Do's
controller
right it knows to use this to-do's
controller all right where the heck is
the to-do's controller coming from look
at the controller's folder find the
to-do's file inside of there all right
here's our controllers folder here's the
to-do's file
and this to Do's controller has so many
different methods on it
it has the get to Do's the create to do
the mark complete the mark incomplete
the delete to do but let's look let's
look at our router
the router said all right it was a post
on create to do we're going to use the
to-do's controller and specifically the
create to do method
the create to do method so let's look at
the to-do's controller and let's look at
the create to do method to Do's
controller
create to do method there we go
cool
now we can follow along with what we're
supposed to do inside this controller
so we are going to go ahead right we're
going to go ahead
and use
the to do model
which has a schema
to then go ahead and create our to do
and so since we are using Mongoose we
know where to go to add this to our
database and since we have a schema we
actually have the ability that if this
was incorrect like let's say we tried to
add some something else here like
right would this match our schema
if we tried to just randomly add some
other stuff in here
right this wouldn't match our schema so
we would have the ability to reject
we'd have the ability to reject right
this this this creation of a to do
because it didn't match our schema
right
cool
but it matches our schema so we should
be all right we go ahead and create our
to do and then what do we do as our
response
what do we do as our response
we redirect back to to-do's and this is
really important because we didn't
redirect back to the root right we
didn't redirect back to the root we
redirected back to to Do's like we
stayed where we are right because we had
just done four slash that would have
taken us back to the main page right
that's not what we did we refreshed the
page we were on
and so when we refresh the page that we
are on right when we refresh the page
that we are on that is now what request
the get request beautiful
it's a get request all right now that
get request is on the to-do's route so
let's start at the very beginning of our
server is it a root request a root route
or a to-do's route
ah it's a to-do's route it's a get on
the root route of to-do's so we gotta go
find our to-do's route so we already
have open here's our to-do's routes it
was a get request on the route route of
to-do's so we're going to use the
to-do's controller and we're going to
use the get to Do's method so here's the
to-do's controller
and we're going to use the get to Do's
method and if we look at the get to Do's
method we have some wonderful stuff here
right
right so what are we going to do we're
going to use our model the model is the
only thing that knows how to talk to our
database right do you like it knows how
to talk to our database and we're going
to use that model to find all of our
to-do's that are in our mongodb database
right we'll pass that into our ejs our
to-do's ejs right we'll pass everything
that comes back into that ejs
we also will count how many things are
still left to do also pass that into our
ejs right so the controller file that
we're in right now is passing off the
actual to Do's from our database the
total number of items left into our
database from our database into our
to-do's ejs we go to our views file I'm
sorry I've used folder
views folder has a to-do's ejs and we're
passing all of that stuff all that stuff
into our ejs template our ejs spits out
our HTML and then our to-do's controller
with the get to Do's method responds
with that
HTML so when we
when we
simply submitted the form we jump
through all of those
individual pieces
and it can seem like a lot at first
right
but once you have this structure once
you have this structure
the the world is yours because now you
know how to set up your controllers
right and if you wanted to add something
else to this application right if you
wanted to say if you wanted to do to
Do's but also like a Pomodoro tracker
well then you just have a bunch of
Pomodoro tracker controllers right and
if you decide you didn't want to use ejs
anymore you really like handlebars well
you just chop out ejs for handlebars and
if for some reason you wanted to update
the the stuff that's going into the
database well you can just mess with the
model right and so
we're starting to see this
MVC come together lots of hot but lots
of like pumps to overcome lots of hops
to do lots of little things to to jump
around in
but once you can start to see that
pattern all right we're going from here
to here to here well then you get so
much modularity so much flexibility to
your code and there are still pieces we
have to clarify right there are still
little things that we have to add right
for this all to come together we really
haven't yet gone through and really kind
of looked at like even like our server
file we haven't really looked through
like how we're connecting to the
database right we haven't really looked
through like how like a lot of this like
the little things are coming together
for how this really really works
underneath the hood
but this is our first pass
right this is our first pass this is
meant for us to kind of start to see all
right NBC I maybe I can kind of get it
we have requests that come in the router
hands those requests off to individual
controllers and those controllers are
set up to do whatever we need to do and
sometimes the controller will just talk
directly to the Views sometimes the
controller will talk to the model right
and that's kind of where we're starting
to to be that's where I want you to
exist I don't care if you can't go out
there right now and code a controller I
don't care if you can't go out there
right now
and um code uh code code out the the the
the EGS that I have here that's that's
not where I want you to be
I want you to be able to see that the
Hops gets in the jumps that we are
taking
cool
all right now
your homework
there's a lot of pieces that are missing
here what the heck is Mongoose what the
heck is a schema right and any of the
other little bits that we're missing
here I'm putting on you right now all
right I want you to build a lecture on
what MVC is what it is how it's helpful
and then any of the pieces here that
don't make sense I want you to research
on your own
by yourself
yes
that means
by yourself
[Laughter]
put in the time and the energy to work
through it on your
own
okay now
we're gonna come back on Thursday and do
more of this we're gonna see the bits
and pieces that we haven't got a chance
to cover tonight Sunday we're going to
do it again all the way from scratch
showing all the little itty bits how
things come together right
but I need you to put in that cognitive
effort
to learn some of these key Concepts
before I introduce them to you
right
and the reason for that is because in a
few weeks you were all leaving
the wonderful confines of the hundred
devs agency and you will be on a team
as an entry-level engineer
where you will be plopped into a new
code base
that code base will use lots of
techniques tricks code languages things
that you have not seen before things
that will not make sense to you
and I won't be here
my wolf won't be there
the rest of the stream team won't be
there it's going to be you
and you're going to have to figure it
out
and so I like my students to get used to
that process right to get used to that
process now knowing that on Thursday
we're going to review it again knowing
that on Sunday right knowing that on
Sunday we're gonna do it again in more
detail
right and so get used to that practice
let your brain sweat a little bit dig in
what the heck's a schema what the heck
is a model what the heck are I I don't
get this required what the heck's going
on there right spend some time
going through it on your own diving into
resources that you can find and build me
a lecture on MVC I promise you if you do
this I Pro just do it
I promise you if you do this it helps
things click and it's really good
practice for being on the job
okay
really really good practice for being on
the job and so I'm going to start doing
some of these things at the end of class
where
you shouldn't really feel that
comfortable
because I haven't covered everything
right
and and you're gonna have to fill in the
gaps
and this is going to be on purpose
because that's what you're going to be
doing on the job all right and I would
not be preparing you if you got through
the hiring process because I'm going to
make you a lean mean interviewing
machine you're gonna be able to do data
structures and algorithms with the best
of them you're going to be able to have
beautiful projects in your portfolio I
would be doing you a disservice if I
showed you how to interview really
really well got the job and then in the
first 30 days you're just you're
drowning so we start with the beginning
the beginnings of feeling uncomfortable
and working through some of that
uncomfortableness so that we can be
doing that on the job okay
so we're going to end a little early
tonight
uh we'll probably still let's just still
still do a raid just to give somebody
some love and some follows
um but then you should
uh stop and take some of this time right
take some of this time to
take some of this time to work through
your lecture on MVC okay
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
hey does this work
21 21 21 21 21.
yeah
hey good morning good afternoon good
morning good afternoon good evening no
matter where you're coming from hope you
all are doing well let's go hello is
Rufio with the ray Rubio Rufio Rufio
what 87 let's go stream team keep going
up up up up I love to see it
what's going on
hey what's going on everybody welcome
back welcome back
good morning good afternoon hey I
actually take a really good question
just put in chat morning afternoon or
evening for what it is for you morning
afternoon or evening in chat for me I'm
curious
I've never actually asked this before
evening afternoon
morning we've got a few mornings
sprinkled in
shout out to all the morning folks or
like the really really late evening
folks all right cool wow I've actually
never
this is pretty interesting to see so
quite quite a few most folks it's
evening it seems like quite a few
afternoons and then a fair amount of
morning folks which is cool to see hey
well I'm glad that you all are here
welcome back we got some more MVC to get
into uh last class we walked through the
basics we saw kind of the big stuff but
we didn't really hint at a few other
things mainly uh deleting updating so
that we can see some of the new stuff
that's there follow some of the new
Pathways that are there see things like
data sets come into into play so we have
a few more things to get to with MVC to
set the Level Playing Field so we can
jump into authentication authentication
is going to sprinkle on top of what we
have here so if you got questions I got
answers super excited to get through the
stuff we didn't get through on Tuesday
make sure folks are feeling good make
sure things are starting to sink in if
you have questions I did share a slido
uh in the following materials channel so
some folks have been putting questions
in there I'm going to take some time to
answer those questions tonight and
Sunday for office hours so if things are
still aren't clicking
please come back to office hours on
Sunday I will put more time in to make
sure everything makes sense
all right
uh urchin said congrats to all the new
deaths who got jobs yeah we don't have
slides this week next week we have like
really like a lot of slides because
there's a lot of detail I have to walk
through lots of spicy memes for y'all
um so I'll put all the jobs uh on our
Tuesday slides so don't miss Tuesday we
have a lot of folks to celebrate
so many folks have gotten jobs in the
last week it's kind of wild uh so yeah I
try my best to to capture all of them
put them into the slide just as a quick
celebration uh but take a look at that
celebrations Channel folks uh take a
look at Twitter like it's been popping
off recently and we're not even there
yet we're not even there yet we're not
even in the hunt yet uh but we're folks
are cruising along so I love to see it
I've already started my 100 hours
project so I incorporate MVC code from
last class or yeah I I think really
after like if if this MVC stuff feels
comfortable you'd want to start using it
for your your 100 hours project because
one of the questions that always comes
up right one of the questions that
always comes up for entry-level
Engineers is well tell me about how you
write code or tell me about the things
you think through when writing code and
folks that are like entry-level
Engineers that just do a like a normal
boot camp not the 100 devs Academy right
they don't really have an answer to that
question but we have two really solid
answers to that question on the front
end we adhere to separation of concerns
the Golden Rule and on the back end we
separate our architecture using MVC and
so you want to start incorporating the
MVC structure into your applications so
that when architecture questions come up
during your interviews you can talk
through them it's just a really
beautiful thing to have like your 100
hours project be a really well uh
architected application and it's not too
hard once this MVC stuff sinks in and so
you'll use this going forward and next
week we add next week we add in
the little bit of authentication that we
need to have like user logins and stuff
like that having multiple collections in
our mongodb database and that's what
we'll really use going forward because
it has everything that you need
cool
uh are we doing more crud review during
office hours well we're going to start
building out bigger and bigger
applications
right and so we need to get through that
point where we we have authentication
and then once we add authentication
we'll do like another Mega stream like
where we do like the full nine hours
from beginning to end with a full crud
application that follows MVC that has
authentication so we're building up
right we've we've started off building
crud apps now we're building crud apps
with MVC next equal build crud apps with
MVC and authentication and then we'll
build something from scratch together
and then our really big project that
we'll do after that uh will be to build
an Instagram clone so
there's a lot of stuff that goes into
that Instagram clone that you could then
once we build that you can build
anything you want right because
Instagram has like image uploading like
profiles uh individual Pages for
individual users uh there's login all
that wonderful stuff right so uh that's
what we're building up to and actually
one of the questions in the slido was uh
MVC seems to be a common pattern are
there templates for apps with pre-built
methods to handle crud including
validations and standard Mongoose
schemas absolutely like there are a
bunch of them out there I actually
showed the hackathon starter on stream
um last class but the beautiful thing is
that's what we're building up to here
together so that by the time we get to
the Instagram clone it's not because I
want you to build an Instagram clone
it's that the Instagram clone has
everything you would really need to
build whatever the heck is that you want
to build and we've built up together
through it so it's not completely just
out of left field toward all these
pieces and Bobs do right we've worked up
to it there's tons of lectures you can
go back to and see like oh I don't
understand this piece Leon walked
through it and kind of understand it and
then that's your template going forward
uh there are a bunch of other ones but
the one that we built together in class
could really suit you really really well
until you get to your job once you're on
the job they will do things in their own
way right they will use their own
systems their own tools their own
Frameworks and you're gonna have to
learn that but for the projects we do
together that's a good template so I
don't think you need to go off the deep
end to learn something else
um but what we build here will be enough
to get you through the job and once you
get to the job you you take over from
there
um just a quick check is the closed
captioning working because I see it
running on my end but somebody mentioned
that they didn't have it the other day
so make sure closed captioning is
working before we continue
yep working awesome thank you so much ah
as we let folks get in we always like to
do questions
um but before we do that if you haven't
checked in please check in exclamation
point check in for the link for today go
that tweet like it retweet it please
house more folks find us but also lets
me know that you are here uh blah and I
are meeting on Friday to finalize our
process for the hunt uh meaning that
we're gonna figure out like folks that
need verification uh folks that need
references things like that so we're
going to finalize that process the mods
are meeting on Sunday so that we can we
can put that process into place and so
next week we'll start kind of talking
about those things so next week we'll
probably do like an intro to the hunt
type class uh and of course
authentication yeah
it's hard to get a job with these boot
camp tweets we chilled the boot camp
tooth at the end
um but we've had folks get hundreds of
folks get jobs that have done the tweets
the retweets people people don't care
like it just it's it's come up like once
out of hundreds of places yeah so you'll
chill it as we get closer to the hunt
um but for now let me know you're here
yeah people don't care honestly that
that's the thing like so many
entry-level Engineers they get they get
caught up in like all these things that
have to like they think that recruiters
care about is just data's dull so that's
one of the things we talk about during
the Hunt is like what really matters
what really moves the needle um and
remember it's a numbers game even if one
person dismisses you for something silly
there's so many more fish in the sea
yeah
cool
all right uh thank you for checking in
uh no slides today because we have a lot
of code to go through next week we bring
back the slides like I said I got a lot
of slides for you next week because we
got a lot of stuff to get into with the
authentication bit
um I always start off with some
questions and I shared the slider so I
have a few questions coming in uh let's
start with these questions real quick
and then we'll jump into class like
normal all right do we turn in our MVC
presentations today no they are due on
Tuesday uh Tuesday right so
on Tuesday I'll ask for your
presentation that walks through what is
MVC what are models what are views what
are controllers I want you to put some
time in on your own to build that
presentation and the reason being
because a lot of you are about to leave
the the wonderful Halls of the 100 devs
agency and walk into companies with new
technologies new Stacks new things that
you haven't heard of before and you have
to gear up very very quickly on those
tools Technologies tips tricks and so
something I need you to start practicing
now getting some a little more
comfortable with it don't worry we're
going to cover a lot of this stuff today
we're going to cover more of this stuff
on on Sunday we have the stream team
members have been doing some stuff too
my own wolf did some MVC stuff yesterday
so I'll share that link after class and
uh hello Rufio shared a link with me too
that I'm going to share as well so uh
there's lots of chances for you to get
caught up on that material too
all right
another question we had here uh what's
the point of having a router in addition
to a controller instead of just a
controller when all the router does is
direct the request to the controller so
it's just a layer of abstraction right
right just a layer of abstraction and so
the route is really listening for that
request it's really listening for that
URL and then handing it off to the
appropriate controller now you could put
that all in one file
right you could have listening for all
the URLs right listening for all the
URLs right and it would it could
possibly work right but let's say we
want it to change
right let's say I want to change all the
routes tied to to Do's well think about
that for a second I want to change all
the routes tied to to-do's
I want to change it from to Do's to to
to to Rainbow right I want to change it
from today's to Rainbow and so since I
have my router file all set up nice and
neat and I want to change it from to
Do's to Rainbow in my server.js I would
just change this from to do's
to Rainbow and I'm done
right now from today's to today's
exactly so now all of my routes right
all of my routes are no longer slashed
to Do's it's now slash rainbow
and so that was one change that enabled
me to to fundamentally change how
routing Works throughout my entire
application so to me that's way more
worth it to have these routers kind of
separate out because I might want to
change the path thing or I might want to
change the URLs that my application is
using and this enables me to do that
very very quickly
um what's a real world scenario that you
want to change routes like that well
when you're working on a team let's
think let's say you're working in a
really big company uh let's think of
like Wayfair that sells dozens and
dozens of different kind of furniture
and stuff like that and maybe their
routes get broken down into tables
chairs let's say tables and chairs right
but now they said you know what uh we
have tables and chairs but we also want
like side tables so side tables is like
a new route whereas before everything
was tables now there's also side tables
right and so if there wasn't an easy way
to make those changes you would be going
through lots of lines of code to fix all
these routes right now the other thing
too is that yes we made this the
switch from Rainbow to to Do's but the
other wonderful thing is I don't have to
worry about somebody like really
breaking my routes
right if all my routes were in this
singular file like if all this stuff
from my to-do's was in here and all this
stuff from my home was in my server.js
and somebody starts making changes we
have to think about the maintainability
of our code base over a long period of
time right if my route stopped working I
know where to go and look to see if
things are working or not working right
I can see all right did somebody mess
with my to do's and my my my re like my
my root route if there's nothing wrong
here then I know all right if there's my
if my to-do's still aren't working then
I can just go straight to the to-do's
routes file and look here and figure out
what's going on but if I have everything
in Just One Singular file
the chances of someone messing up my
routes is very very easy or if somebody
decides to change one thing to another
like it's just having that just extra
layer of Separation just makes the code
base a little bit more maintainable
um over the Long Haul and so that's why
I do it
um and I and I like it so that I can I
can quickly change my routes on the whim
I know that folks if they're in the if
they're in like say the to do routes
file they know that they're messing with
the to-do routes right like if you're in
the to do routes file you know that
you're messing with the to-do routes if
you're just in the server.js and
everything's there and you're making
changes you might not know that you're
messing up the routes for the entire
rest of the application so a little bit
more
a little bit more abstraction which
helps us not lose sleep at night when
changes are made that's kind of the
purpose there
cool
uh is it better to name each file to do
JS or is it better to be descriptive and
call them route to Do's view to Do's
controller to Do's that's actually a
really good suggestion right
um that's really a good suggestion you
could have your file names be a little
bit more descriptive so that you know
when you're looking at the file where
the file also exists right so we're
looking at right now the to Do's uh
router right if you're looking at the
to-do's router you could call this to
Do's router
I personally just always look at the
folder names anyway uh so I don't do
that because I think it adds a little
bit more
um complexity to a file a naming
convention that everyone would have to
follow right and so just a lot of the
teams I've worked on we haven't used
that naming convention typically we look
at folders and then files and that's
okay
um
that's up to you though you might join a
team that has a different naming
convention and that's okay right and you
might come up with a name if you
mentioned that helps you build out your
100 hours project whatever it is
document it and stick to it
mm-hmm
what am I sipping on I'm doing just uh
instant iced coffee
what's the drip today this is my gnu
shirt
um yeah
your new Linux
yeah as long as you're consistent
exactly you can make up any of the
naming conventions that you want it's
just about being consistent and what
works for you yeah
cool
how do I check if something exists in
the database before executing and
creating a new object we're not 100
there yet
um when we get to our our full stack
apps that we're building together with
Instagram I'll show you how we don't
have repeat stuff we're going to see a
small sliver of kind of the beginnings
of that tonight because we're going to
be using IDs and data sets and all that
fun stuff so we're going to kind of hint
that a little bit tonight and then we'll
see it in in full action once we get to
our authentication I don't like to jump
all the way right to it um because it's
just not something that we need to
optimize for right now so it's one of
the things that we'll build up to but I
don't like to show it right now just
because I think it gets folks too
confused and just not something to worry
about for right now
we'll get there I'll tease a little bit
tonight and then we'll get there over
the next couple days
uh just gonna kind of wrap up a few more
of these questions and we're gonna start
looking at the code
um
the MVC video shows that the views
report back to the client directly
instead of the view sending info to the
controller and then the client does this
matter
um so it kind of depends on what you're
doing
it depends on uh
how your MVC is set up right it can
depend on the tools and technologies
that you're using the Frameworks that
you're using the libraries that you're
using kind of like how this process
happens
um it's also a little bit more muddled
than a nice clean graphic could uh
present right so if we look at let's say
our to Do's controller we can see in our
get to Do's yes we are using our to do
model which we'll talk through again
today and we are asking it to render
right so we are asking ejs to render and
then once it renders that file we are
responding so the the handing off to the
view is kind of intertwined right now in
the controller
um
and so the the actual like passing back
and forth it depends on what you're
doing right now the controller is asking
EGS to render and then responding with
whatever was rendered yeah
so how true or not that is depends on
the libraries that you're using and and
how you've written out your code to kind
of abstract out these different concerns
all right so I think we got some of the
pretty
pretty kind of standard question so far
if you have more questions that come up
of course you can always use chat uh and
then the other thing you can do is just
keep putting in the slido the questions
that get upvoted I'll answer at the end
of class and then we'll also review some
on Sunday as well
cool
all right uh just so I can kind of get a
pulse check how are folks feeling with
MVC so far
um how is I know there's a lot of like
hopping jumping skipping but how are
folks kind of feeling with the the MVC
got some arms got some Goods got some
great decent
good
50 50 scared feeling great I seems like
folks are in a good spot
a little confused when I get the broad
concept because that's where we should
probably be not bad
okay
cool let's take a look a little bit
deeper tonight at some of the things
that we started introducing on Tuesday
uh we'll keep asking questions keep
putting questions in the slido I will
keep working through it so that folks
can get that a clearer picture
and then like I said on Sunday we'll
have more time to go from the beginning
uh for folks especially that missed
Tuesday's class
I couldn't quote it myself yet but
broadly understand the concepts that's
exactly where we should be
um little secret right now
you shouldn't be able to code any of
this from scratch like if you did
like if you could
you're you're like a like you're like a
savant right like if you could go to all
this from scratch like no one does that
no one would legitimately build all of
this from scratch if they're building a
full like crud application right
I might be able to do it I'm sure I
would miss a few things but that would
like not be a good use of my time
why when I code all this from scratch
when I've already put together a
beautiful template that has all this
stuff right like all the stuff already
coded out for me right I could copy and
paste that and start with everything in
the right place knowing that everything
is connected knowing that everything is
is just ready to run it's got to do an
npm install uh put in my URL my
EnV file and then run it right so
why would I why would I ever do this
from scratch it just doesn't make sense
right uh and so I think I think that's
something that a lot of people kind of
go into this type of lecture with where
they're like Leon I get to Broad
Concepts but I couldn't do it from
scratch that's okay no one does it from
scratch right no one would take the time
to do all of this as long as you
understand all the Legos and how to put
them together you are in the right place
um
now as our application gets bigger we're
gonna have even more right we're gonna
have even more like templated code right
and have even more things that would
just make zero sense like zero sense to
have memorized right let's let's take a
look at it real quick just to to
Hammer home this point real quick
um
there we go
so it makes a little bit bigger this is
the off that I linked for you to take a
peek let's look at our let's look at our
passport JS file here
you're not memorizing this
you're just not
why
right
the best Engineers don't write this from
scratch they know where to get the code
that they need they use libraries and
tools to assist them right
track if you were saying travesty copy
and paste it from documentation exactly
because we're all kind of building on
top of the shoulders of giants right
somebody's put a lot of time into making
sure that passport works right so I can
just link it and put it into my code
right
right and so I think you you got to let
that that
you
chill take a deep breath let it out you
don't have to have this memorized you're
just kind of piecing things together
right there will be times where you have
to write a lot of code but a lot of this
like glue and like building the project
is not where you put in that time
yeah
cool
are you gonna practice them you already
have the templates all the starter code
that I share are your templates and like
I said we're going to keep adding more
and more pieces onto these templates and
uh the templates are already on our our
100 devs GitHub so you can always just
go grab what you need and they'll stay
up forever so if you're if you're let's
say you you leave the hollowed Halls of
100 devs you go off to join a team that
uses PHP and then in two years you're
back to node right well come back and
grab the templates hopefully they're
updated a little bit but that's it
school's hammering hammering plagiarism
is bad into my brain really makes this
Con copy and paste concept challenging
well here's the wonderful thing so
here's the wonderful thing right
it's not plagiarism
because there are licenses on the code
that we use right so uh most of my code
is either GPL V3 or MIT and all the code
that I use is the same either MIT or GPL
V3 and that means you can use it for
whatever purpose you want to use it for
right and so
um one of the things I love about this
code I have here is my database JS like
how we connect to the database right and
if you're looking at this you're like
hmm that looks familiar because this is
Brad's connecting to the the database
right this is the one we saw in the
video but this code is MIT license so I
was like that's really elegant it's
really easy to understand people can see
it and knows what it knows what it does
I wish I could use it and then boom
laces as MIT right and so
a lot of the code that we're using is
giving you permission to use it which is
beautiful and it's one of the most
wonderful things about coding yeah uh
people like MIT it's just the name of
the license uh the MIT license is a
license that kind of just lets you do
whatever the heck you want with the code
um there are plenty of other licenses
outside of that MIT is in the school yep
exactly my T is the school but the
beautiful thing is you can always
typically check the license on code and
and and do it so all of my code that we
generated 100 devs will be MIT licensed
or GPL V3 so you can use it do whatever
the heck you want with it I don't care
I'm working on licensing all of my other
content so all the videos all the
homeworks all that stuff to be a free
use license as well so pretty much
everything we generate 100 devs you
could take it build a whole another boot
camp with it I don't care right like
as long as it's helping people that's
what we want it to do right so
um I just gotta I've been talking to
somebody just to figure out like what
the best use like best license for like
non-code content is
um so that we could figure out how to do
that yeah
hey blah
cool
alrighty so
um tonight we are going to look through
a little bit more of this code uh see
the things that we're going to need to
better understand what's happening we're
going to review the MVC structure and
then the two big things like I said are
kind of seeing the deleting because we
have something interesting uh we we have
in our application the ability to do
something like this
all right so now I have three to Do's I
have a first try a second try and a
first try and I can delete that specific
first try like if I if I go back again
and I do
first try again
and I can go ahead and delete like that
specific first try so we can see that
the first try that was above got delete
the first try that below got deleted
right so we haven't seen that before
right we haven't seen this ability to
delete specific elements exactly when
they're the exact same text right like I
said we're building up to being able to
have a little bit more like realistic
code and so we're going to see that
tonight like how does that work how are
we able to delete stuff that's exactly
the same and know which one we're
deleting and we're going to see uh
the updating and a little bit more of
the egs2 that's going on here so I want
to kind of walk through the pieces of
the application and then dive deeper
into the codes that's where we're going
to start
uh if you need the code everything of
course is always Linked In Our Discord
in the follow along materials Channel if
you're watching this on YouTube or
somewhere else please come to Discord
that's what makes this program work
um come get the help that you need come
help others learn we are Community
taught so all the coding is on Discord
come grab it come hang out come answer
questions help get help that you might
need
alrighty
so here is our server JS file and on
Tuesday I didn't really walk through it
but there's some things I just kind of
want to bring back to mine uh just so
that we understand what's happening if
you've cloned down my code you're gonna
have to do two major things one you're
gonna do the mpm install right npm
install sorry yeah npm install will give
you the the lovely node packages or the
npm packages that you need to make this
work and you need to in your EnV file
right in your EMV file put your
string uh so when you use Atlas
and you create a new cluster uh it'll
give you a connection string all you do
is Click connect it'll give you that
connection string you throw it in here
with the appropriate username password
and make sure your IP address right make
sure your IP address is is accessible if
you want to open it to everyone you want
to White list all the IP addresses so
if you've just cloned down my code uh
why why wouldn't you be able to why
wouldn't you be able to add new to Do's
to my to my application you have all the
code why aren't we having a bunch of
Griefers put new stuff here
exactly only my IP address is white
listed at the moment meaning unless you
have unless you have the same IP as me
you can't actually wind up making
changes uh to this application cool
alrighty so you've cloned down the code
you've put in your connection string
from mongodb right uh now you should be
able and you've done your npm install
now the application should work
um I do npm let's go ahead and clear
this real quick
npm start to start my server
and we're going to notice something
slightly different about the way the
server is running now
um
slightly different than we've seen in
the past and like a
h lean back
lean back
just off your shoulder and leave
I remember remember
think about this too
if you're like in your late 20s early
30s or older we had it real easy because
in the club this is all we had to do
this was it this is what we were doing
in the club
that was it you see at home one more
time for the new folks boom that was it
that's all we had to do have you seen
these tick-tockers
have you seen these Tick Tock nah
um I'm glad I'm married I already have
my kid
foreign
something's a little different here
though
it's a little different here right
sounds a little different here what what
are we using here that we haven't used
really in the past some of you might
have used it nodemon
uh so nodemon is running uh and what
nodemon will do is it'll restart my
server when I make changes so instead of
having to like start
stop or make my change start restock
restart my server each time nodemon is
listening for those changes in my files
and when I make changes in those files
it automatically restarts my server for
me if you look at my package.json I have
my scripts section and this is where
that npm start comes from right I can do
npm start right I can do npm start and
it's going to do the command to do node
mon server.js right so it could be we
could have made npm start do node
server.js and that would have started
our server like normal but I've set mine
up to do nodemon server.js now I don't
introduce gnomon right away because I've
been in interviews where folks have
painfully not known how to start and
stop their server uh so I always make
for make sure folks know how to start
and stop their server with node and then
the file and then we introduced nodemon
but please if you get used to nodemon
don't forget that you do on occasion
especially in interviews if you're using
like their box uh like their code or
whatever they might not have node Mon
and you might have to remember to start
and stop your server so just remember
that
um eventually we'll also have like uh
development versions of our code and
production versions of our code meaning
that we might have some stuff running
during our development process uh
testing linters hinters all that stuff
that might not be running in production
and so we might have like npm start Dev
or npm start prod so we'll start to see
more and more kind of like these little
scripts that help kind of our server
start and run
but
someone got really excited about uh
Scripts
all right so we saw that
and that's how our server is running and
I want to start off with our server.js
file just to kind of briefly go through
everything we've covered a lot of this
in the past but let's see it all we are
using Express this is still an express
application it's still our wonderful
crud apps that we know and love and we
are using Express to help us build out
our API we're using Express for all the
wonderful things that we've learned that
helps us so we don't the right raw HTTP
methods we have to write raw FS modules
all that fun stuff Express is doing all
the heavy lifting for us to help build
out our API
cool
next we have our connect DB and connect
DB in this case is a variable that's
going to be holding something whenever
we see this require we're going to a
different file to get something
sometimes we'll go to a different file
and we'll get a function sometimes we'll
go to a different file and we'll get an
object sometimes we'll go to a different
file and we'll get a link to another
file right like that that weirdly can
happen right in this case I'm going to
my config folder and then to my database
file so let's take a look at that here
is my config folder and then my database
file and so in this database file you
can see that we export connectdb and
connect DB is just a function it is a
function that enables me to connect to
my database using Mongoose right so
Mongoose if you start to build out your
presentation is a little bit different
than mongodb we get a lot of little
extras that are going to help us talk to
our database via our models we get a
slightly different Syntax for certain
things that we're going to see tonight
create instead of insert one little
differences here and there but it can
really help us to build out our
application a little bit more a little
bit a little bit easier and so you can
see in this file what is getting
exported is this function right here and
this function is what connects us to our
database now there's something really
interesting about this if this file
spits out a function if we want this
file to do its job what has to happen
what has to happen
yeah we have to call it a function don't
do nothing it's happy to sit on the
block all day long no action right if we
want our function to do something we
have to call it so we can see that this
is a function that connects to our
database we see that we spit out that
function
but when we go back to our server.js you
can see that here is where we actually
call it right those parentheses are
letting us know that we are calling that
connect DB function that function came
from being spit out of this file
so it's not enough to just require that
function we actually had to run it or
else we never would have connected to
our DB
right and we talked earlier earlier that
this lovely connection this database
file is something you should be familiar
with it was from the videos this is Brad
traverse's connection I love this one
it's very clear very easy to see and
would you know how to code this from
scratch you might be able to do it after
a few times but you don't have to you
can just include this file right you can
include this file in your projects going
forward it is MIT licensed right and you
don't have to think about it you just
know that this is going to connect to
your database no problem now there are a
few other things in here that are really
helpful just as a reminder you can see
that we're trying to connect to our
database but the connection to our
database isn't here
we have this
process.env DB underscore string
huh
what's that mean
yeah it's an environment variable we
have to go to our
e and v file right to find this DB
string and if we look at our EnV file
our environment variables are listed
here I have an environment variable for
my port and I have an environment
variable for the connection to my
database now
how
how does my application know how to use
these
right one of the the weirdest things
about node to me is that this is not
built in
this is not built in like node by
default doesn't like recognize this
stuff and so if we go back and we look
at our server.js we had to say hey
server listen for these environment
variables know how to use this EnV file
right know how to go find it hey it's in
our config folder and then there's an
EnV file if we don't have this string
any of the environment files right any
of the environment files that we're
trying to use just won't run
and so a lot of folks have been asking
me recently about other
other ways of running our code right
remember node is the environment in
which we're running our code but there
are competitors there's Dino there's bun
and all these kind of up-and-comers that
want to take away market share from node
and they're adding a lot of quality of
life improvements meaning that in say
bun EnV files just work you don't need a
third-party package right so that's
something that's pretty cool that some
of these newer environments give you
access to without needing something
extra right and so I think that's that's
something really cool like this is one
of those things where like if you're in
an interview and somebody asks you is
like what do you think about node maybe
like well I love node it's helped me
build wonderful applications but I love
some of these up and comers that have
these quality of life improvements right
like having EnV files built in so so
much of interviewing is being able to
like talk that talk and it's one of
these talking points that helps you
sound you know you got it in the bag you
know what I'm saying I'll keep that one
in your back pocket add it to your your
Anki deck uh and we'll be Wicked
cool so our our server address file has
connected to our EnV files we've
connected to our database uh we're we're
pretty much Off to the Races here like
we're in a good spot
um why the heck am I using an EnV file
anyway just as a quick question
yeah it's my secrets exactly it's the
stuff that when I push this code to
GitHub I don't want folks to see I
unfortunately have to share all my
secrets with you so that you have a
application that works uh because
writing readme files is is just not
something I think to do in the moment
so thank you for all the PRS that have
come in through with with how to do it
uh but for me I I push this EnV file so
you could see it but I limited the IP
addresses on my end right but for
y'all there's gonna be a lot of secrets
that you don't want to push up to the
Internet especially as our applications
get more and more complex
by the end of program we're gonna have
things like our connection are
cloudinary like where we store our
images some of our Heroku stuff where
we're hosting our applications we're
gonna have so so many Google Google like
analytics stuff we're gonna have
um
what are some other ones that we're
gonna have some some like Fancy Search
stuff some contentful stuff they're
gonna have so many different things that
are like keys that we just wouldn't want
to push up to the to the interwebs right
because somebody would just take them
and be able to do whatever the heck they
wanted with our our services so we put
everything into the EnV file and we make
sure that our EnV file is in our git
ignore so you would dot EnV and boom
somebody said what about logs
that's actually really important to uh
to keep in mind
if you have ever committed changes that
included uh like your EnV file before
you add it to your git ignore so you
can't like
you can't have like pushed
your keys to GitHub and then realize it
and then like delete the file add it to
your or like add it to your git ignore
and then re-push it's still like in your
git history like your commit history on
GitHub so just be careful about that I
know a few people have gotten got by
doing that uh so that is something
worthwhile to bring up
cool all right
so we know we're using Express we feel
comfortable with that we've connected to
our database we feel comfortable with
that we have uh we're letting no know
that we want to use our environment
variables so we can use them throughout
our application now and the other two
things we saw on Tuesday is that we have
linked to our routes so we're going to
listen for the requests come through and
then hand the request off to the routes
and the routes will know which
controller to use based on not only the
route but also the what very very oddly
phrased question but the route's gonna
know which controller to use based off
of the route and one other thing
yeah the method exactly the route's
gonna be paying attention to not only
sorry the routers will be paying
attention not only to the route but was
it a get a post a put a delete and based
off of the matching route and the method
it'll know which controller to use
beautiful
all right uh next we're saying hey we're
using our specific view engine which is
ejs that's in the game right without
without this line we wouldn't know what
views to use like how we're going to
handle our views and so you could swap
out ejs to something else but for now
we'll be using it eventually our views
will be handled by react cool
uh we also set up our public folder so
this application has a lot of stuff
going on if we look at our application
what type of files do we already know
just by looking at this what type of
files are going to be in our public
folder remember the public folder
right the public folder hosts all of our
static files uh so we don't have to
write individual routes and then like
individual controllers for them which
would be a pain in the butt
yeah we're looking at this right now we
know that in our public folder is going
to be our CSS because we can see that
there's red color and if we're like
clicking on stuff the only thing that
can hear that clicking is our
client-side JavaScript so in our public
folder will definitely be some CSS and
probably some javascripts because we can
like click on stuff and there's yeah so
if we look at our public folder
public we can see that there's a CSS
folder with our style.css and there's a
JavaScript folder with our main JS right
so that's within our public folder then
we have these two lines right here uh
and these two lines replace something
called body parser and body parser is in
the name meaning that we can parse stuff
that comes out of the body so remember
whenever we're making a request to the
server there's a lot of information that
comes along with the request and we're
able to yoink the stuff out of those
requests so that we can use them now in
our controllers to then go make requests
or hand them off to the Views but we
have a lot of times we need to pull data
out of the request what was in the form
when the form was submitted
um what exactly was clicked on when you
clicked on the delete like what what
item are you trying to delete all that
stuff we're pulling out of the body and
these two lines help us do it
cool uh then we're telling our
application to uh use these specific
routes and so this is something that's
built into Express this routing is now
handled by Express and so if we're using
the default route we'll use these home
routes and if we're using a to-do's
route we'll use this to do routes file
so just kind of separating out our
different routers just to make our lives
a little bit easier a little bit more
flexibility and a little bit more
maintainability because somebody's
probably not going to mess up this bit
of code and if they do I know exactly
where to go look and then the last
little bit here is this app.listen and
we are using our environment variable
for the port why am I using the
environment variable for the port
like what is that setting me up to do
yeah deployment exactly eventually this
this application is going to be hosted
um we'll use Heroku to host it in the
near future
and that Heroku is probably going to set
their own port for their own servers and
so it's nice to not have a port
hardcoded because that might not be the
port that Heroku wants to use or
whatever hosting provider you are using
so we'll be using Heroku in the
beginning we will see some other
um we will see some other
we will see some other hosting providers
as well Rook is just easy to get up and
running with from the beginning
uh historoku used in a professional
setting isn't more for small projects
it's definitely used in professional
settings especially for a lot of like
startups or like kind of simpler product
companies it's just really quick
um you wind up paying more money though
so a lot of startups will use Heroku
just to get up and running get their
MVPs out and then once it's like set up
then they might switch to something else
that gives them a little bit more
flexibility in terms of like
everything including price
um that's not true for every company so
a lot of people stay on Heroku just
because it's easier it's also really
popular in certain development
communities so Heroku became really
popular in the Ruby on Rails community
and then you'll see like some other
hosting providers are more popular in
other communities
um it just depends on the languages and
who who's kind of like building around
those tools and systems
cool
all right
cool alrighty folks let's go ahead and
take our break uh if you are new around
these parts we like to be healthy we
like to if you're able get up move
around hydrate take care of yourself
during these five minutes uh when we
come back from the five minutes uh we
are going to look into uh some of the
bits and Bobs that we didn't get to last
time I wanted to walk through all the
stuff that was here in the in the actual
structure of our code we're going to
review MVC quickly and we're going to
look at that deleting and we're going to
look at the updating just to walk
through it together as well uh we had
two minutes added to the timer brat Kane
thank you for the extra two minutes this
will be a seven minute break folks oh so
luxurious if you haven't yet already
please go ahead and check in exclamation
point check in I will give you the link
for today and if you're on YouTube go
ahead and give it a like and uh and a
comment
just help the algorithm to boost us on
the YouTubes
alrighty seven minutes on the clock
enjoy the tunes I'll see you soon
alrighty folks come on back come on back
all right so we walked through
the server.js file uh there's a lot of
other little things that are in here
just quickly to kind of touch on them
before jumping back into it uh there
there was there was a newsletter raffle
we'll get to that after the next break
uh the folks that won
the past three newsletter Raffles uh
they you've all gotten a message from me
here on Twitch
so check your twist messages uh grab a
time looking forward to uh chatting with
y'all
all right
so we have some other wonderful things
in here my vs code this is just like my
settings for vs code uh I have things
like larger so you can see them on
stream right larger because I've seen
you want you to see them on stream you
can add this to your git ignore like I
should put that in my git ignore so you
don't have my settings uh but if you're
like why is the text so big that's what
it was for the config right now is
holding our database connection and our
environment variables right but starting
next week it's also going to hold like
some of our stuff for authentication as
well controllers for our controllers
models for our models uh node modules
comes when you do your npm install but
it won't be there when you clone it down
of course public for our static files
some folks are saying could you put HTML
in here you could but we're not using
we're not like serving up any static
files that way we're using EGS to kind
of do all of our HTML but could you do
it yeah of course uh routes for our
routes views for our views and get
ignored so we don't push stuff up to
GitHub or elsewhere we might push our
code and then we have our package.json
which has all the packages we're using
for this application and the lock that
comes through using it and so you can
see in our dependencies we're using our
DOT EnV for our environment variables
ejs for our templating Express to build
out our API mongodb and Mongoose to talk
and connect to our database and then
node mods that we can restart our server
without having to stop and restart and
then the server.js file which you
already saw and our proc file where does
the proc file come from what do we need
that for
nice yeah for broken when we push the
Heroku that's what we're going to use
that for
true give it get us all the give us all
the experimental features I want them
all right
so any questions about folders or folder
structure or kind of the little things
that are happening here
before we look into the MVC a little bit
more
makes sense to me okay yes tons
has go away
chromium yes
EGS is our templing language it's how we
plug different stuff into a template to
spit out HTML if you're new we've been
building up to this for a while so we
started with raw node then we added a
little bit Express we built up we built
up we built up so this is like the sixth
or seventh class and a longer series
building crud app so if this is like
brand new to you probably want to go
back and watch our previous videos on
YouTube exclamation point YouTube to get
access to those
will this be the standard structure for
the rest of program we're going to use a
structure similar to this there will be
things that we add to it some ways of
doing things slightly different but for
the most part it'll be this structure
why start with why start with ejs and
not react from the start
um because a lot of folks won't use
react professionally and it just adds a
whole layer of complexity that most
folks don't need to start when folks are
learning how to code especially for
folks that are new learn how to make
stuff work first so that you can build
and then once you're building think
about and say oh it'd be really nice if
I could do this or it'd be really nice
if I if I didn't have to worry about
that and that's where
the react can come in but when I've
started with react because I've tried it
I've been teaching for 10 years I've
tried starting with react my students
always got lost and they just gave up
um so I'm gonna start with react I want
something simpler that gets you just
injecting stuff into your HTML
um using it like a template and then we
once we learn like the limitations of
that then you can add something extra on
top but jumping straight to it uh it
just doesn't I just haven't seen it be
really useful as a learning mechanism
I'd rather you have a strong base
exactly below
um the travesty video uses handlebars is
that used professionally yeah
um it's kind of like what you a lot of
this is like preference right you can
argue for like why one is better than
the other but a lot of them comes down
to like your personal preference I use
ejs because it's only two things that
you have to learn you have to learn like
they can have stuff in code blocks and
you can have stuff that you're inserting
like variables once you learn that you
can template whatever the heck you want
so I find ejs to be more simple to start
folks off as opposed to something that
has its really own syntax it's like
completely like not completely but looks
different than HTML just a little bit
more of a shock now pug might be a
little bit easier in the long run but
that initial understanding I want people
to see the connections between
everything and so with ejs it's easier
to see those connections
mm-hmm
are any not used professionally no like
any of these big ones probably has a
community of folks that use it right
and so like I said the other big thing
is that this isn't like a learning to
code bootcamp
this is a getting a job program and you
are all going to leave to go to
different companies that all use wildly
different stuff
it's not worth it over investing in one
narrow piece without having a larger
understanding of the broader landscape
so I'm here to give you the broader
landscape and then you can get narrow in
on the job yeah
jokes on you I also learned how to code
it's the goal right coding is the
mechanism for getting the job right cool
I'm gonna take a quick peek at some of
these uh slido questions real quick
uh the MVC lecture submission is that a
PowerPoint or a video oh whatever the
heck you want
um probably most folks are doing like a
Google Slides or a PowerPoint or
slides.com type thing
your favorite Marvel versus Camp comp 2
character I'm a big and I know this is
controversial Spider-Man Captain
American combo web into final Justice
like
like that's that's the uh that's the
combo of combos
uh
if we have interviews to focus on is it
okay to fall behind on homework
tricky question Tricky Tricky
I always want you to prioritize
your interviews but we're really not at
the interview stage yet
for the support that we're going to give
post program I need to have seen that
you've done the work I I can't in good
faith get on a call with someone and say
yeah they're great when you haven't done
the homework and you haven't been here
in class right like that's not something
I'm going to do and so I need you to
have done the things that we've asked
you to do so that I can in good faith be
like yeah this person's awesome here are
the things that they've built they were
always here like like that's what I need
you to be doing yeah
so always prioritize like the the
interview and getting the job but know
that we're not at that phase-it program
so I'm still expecting you to like do
the work
if I fell behind Can I submit the old
work with MVC sure if you want that's
okay
are we gonna do a back and mega review
we will yep we will after we get through
authentication looking for more along
MVC questions though
foreign
if we want an app to be we built to be
able to access a DB do we make that DB
public or there are ways to approve the
app
um So eventually the only thing that
will have access to your database is
wherever you're hosting your application
so like Heroku would have access to your
Atlas right and nothing else so
the only way that you could add stuff
would be through the actual site through
the actual like the the application
itself so we'll get to that yeah
mm-hmm
why is client-side.js and CSS not in the
views folder because the JS and the CSS
has like it's it's not part of our it
it's not part of the view that is being
rendered like we're using our views to
like generate something and the thing
that our views are generating is the
HTML so we we have the way we set it up
now that we can continue to have our
static files like CSS and JavaScript
being public that means we don't have
routes for them other view type engines
might have the CSS and JavaScript
Incorporated right now we've kept it
separate just to have a little bit more
separation of the concerns there but
know that you could be using a certain
thing for your views that has everything
together uh the way we're doing it right
now we just don't but you could
good question
is there another way to do it besides
MVC oh yeah boy is there there are tons
of other ways to architect your
applications we'll actually see some of
them like if you've already dipped your
toes in to react
um or any of the other like front-end
Frameworks or libraries or even like
angular there's like MVC and VVC there's
like a bunch of them that are kind of
riffs on it but there are also other
completely different paradigms MVC is
pretty popular it's pretty easy I think
to wrap your brain around
um especially for the Apple types of
applications that we're building that's
why we start there
yeah
but there are plenty of other things to
do it other ways to do it yeah
can you so there's I'm looking at
there's any other
um
so there's some folks are saying like
are there other folder structures for
like what we have there will be like
like I said like when you join a team
they're gonna have a way of doing it
right
um they they're gonna have a way of
organizing their code they're gonna have
different folder structures and so uh
like I said it's not it's not worth it
to really over invest in one area
um but know that when you join your
company they might have a library folder
some other ways of slightly organizing
it I think this is pretty clear that
there are
um
different like we can see that there's
controllers there's models there's views
and so if you know MVC
um you know what you're doing you know
yeah and Bloss said a good team will a
good team will give you time to find
your way around a repo exactly a good
team like the first month is just like
getting comfortable with the code base
um sometimes even like the first three
months if you're on like a really big
like a really meaty type of team that
has a lot of like pulling from different
areas of the code base
um and a really good team gets you set
up making like really small incremental
changes until you feel comfortable
throughout the entire code base
it's actually one of the questions I
recommend folks ask once they have an
offer once they have an offer
um that's one of the things you might
ask is like what does onboarding look
like what does the developer experience
look like in the first three months how
quickly will I be able to push code to
production these are all questions that
we want to bring up to have a better
understanding of like are you just
thrown into the into the deep end or
they actually support you through uh the
first couple months
cool
um here's one other question I saw here
because I'm only doing MVC type
questions right now
uh can you explain module dot exports
um so instead of having our code in one
giant file we want to be able to
separate our code out into individual
files just so they can be in charge of
doing one thing well for an individual
file to do something but be used
somewhere else we have to like spit it
out so that it can be used somewhere
else right so we saw that with our
database.js this database.js is really
just a function and module.exports spits
out that function and then when we're in
our server.js we can require
that file or that function that's been
spit out so the module exports is just
spitting something out that we can use
somewhere else that's it
um
does this organization of folder slow
the speed oh this does on Tuesday not
really because we're talking about like
speed of light through all this stuff
um if you did have way way more complex
structure
um it could it could slow things down
but at this level not really
you have to do a lot for this to be like
the the slowing down of your application
uh so I had a good question if devs are
changing jobs every two years and
onboarding is three months they are
onboarding 1 8 of the time yes well I
didn't I'm not gonna check your 1 8 math
but yes that's kind of one of the rough
things about hiring developers and why
this process is so wild right they'll
tell people the reason the becoming a
developer at a company process is so
wild is because
What It Takes most companies I I wonder
if folks remember this if there we have
some ogs in the in the house how much do
you think it costs to get an engineer
that you're ready to hire through the
door like all the recruiting all the
interviewing like through the door how
much does it cost
thirty thousand yeah exactly around 30
000 to like get them in the door and
it's different at different companies
right some companies pay way less some
of the companies probably pay more but
you're talking about like 30k like all
is said and done including
um the things maybe they're spending on
Advertising job posting recruiter uh
time for employees to interview so like
you're 30k in the hole and the person
hasn't even started yet let's say
they're making a 100K a year right we'll
just use that for Better Math right and
it takes them three months to really
ramp up right so that means before you
ever realize if an engineer is going to
be effective on your team
you're already 60k in the hole Plus
benefits plus laptop plus all the other
stuff that you have to do right so like
imagine being 60k in the hole and then
you realize they can't code
so that's why there's so many weird
things that happen during the interview
process where they want you to leak code
your brains out or they want you to do
these different types of stuff or they
need to talk to so many different people
because it can be a serious cost for a
lot of companies
um so that's just something to keep in
mind yeah now a lot of companies realize
you know what if we're just good at the
on-ramping right then it doesn't matter
right some companies actually invest in
training their their engineers and the
systems that they want them to be
trained in and so a lot of companies
might have a less
rigorous interview process and that
could be a sign that they might have a
better onboarding process right where
they just get Engineers up to speed so
they don't they lose less people and
they can be less weird during their
interview process so there's a lot of
different things that can happen there
um and it's a very hard thing that's why
the actual hiring process can be all
over the place for different companies
which companies are those
uh so I always have these different
ideas right and one of the ideas is like
I've interacted with hundreds of
companies
um just through my students having
interviewed there I know what companies
are good companies to like interview at
I know which companies are good
companies to like
um to work at and it's it's always been
something I wanted to like publish
um and my Ed at resilient coders
actually has this idea of like an
equitable employment Council
um I have a list I keep the list I've
made this public I have a list
um
where companies like agree to like do
things equitably and then they get put
on the list and like that would make it
so they had more candidates that were
applying uh so blah let's add that to
our talk on Friday I would love to have
like folks that graduate 100 devs having
access to that type of system
um yeah
and then the other fun thing is like
I want people to be paid like I want
people to like I want people to learn
for free but that's not Equitable
because not everybody has the time or
privilege to do this without getting
paid so I want people to get paid to
learn and so one of the things that we
had talked about before which is like
when you graduate you get an nft right
and so that nft could be your ticket to
access the list and so you could access
the list until you get a job and then
maybe you sell that nft that you got for
free and then somebody could buy the nft
to get access to the list right so now
not only did you get access to the list
like get your job but then you resold it
and you got paid for all the work that
you did to graduate 100 devs so if
you're excited by these ideas I have too
much stuff on my plate uh me and blah
are talking a lot about this on Friday
but next week we're going to talk about
a hundred maintainers right so we have
all these little projects I think could
make it really great for 100 deaths we
have lots of senior Engineers that want
to work with you all to build these
ideas and so if that's something you're
excited like hey I would love to be on a
project team that did that to help
everyone let's make it happen so next
week I want to share if you want to join
some of those project teams
um and and start building these things
that can make the community better
um show up next week and we'll talk
about it
cool all right so we answered some
questions we've talked through the
entire code base we've seen all the bits
and bobs
let's talk about some of the things that
um
let's talk through some of the things
that we didn't get to talk to on Tuesday
uh which was this like deleting thing
that's happening and and
um let me delete first try here let me
delete second try here let me add some
stuff here first Troy
cool so we got our first try let's do
our second try
and let's do our third try
and then we're going to do another first
try
uh Nemo yep it's cohort two you want to
be following on YouTube and then join
Discord and join the ketchup crew
let's add another first try here
thank you skint appreciate that all
right so now we have the the first try
second try third time first try and
let's take a look at it
um
let's take a look
let's take a look at this in the
inspector just to see what's happening
here
uh when we look at this in the inspector
what do we notice about these L like
about this li like look at these lies
what's a little different about the Lis
than we've seen before maybe
what do we notice about these Li's that
are different than allies we've seen in
the past
they have this data ID
um and we can see that the first try has
a data ID of like 7f2 7f3 7f4 seven to
five
um so we can probably get a realistic
idea of what's Happening Here but each
of these allies now have their own
individual ID and if we look this first
try and this second first try are
similar in text but they both have
different
IDs like this is 7f2 and this other
first try is 7 F5 so while the text is
the same the IDS are unique where the
heck are these IDs coming from
mongodb automatically generates an ID
for every single document in your
collection so if we actually go look at
our documents and our collections
we should see some stuff that matches
Let me refresh here
all right
I gotta change off of this Virginia East
Coast I need to be on the the West Coast
this is just adding to like the
mind-blowing nature of this like our
request to like leaving La going across
the country coming back and like and
that's being streamed through twitch
which is them being sent to all these
different places like
what
that's how we know we're living in the
simulation anyway all right let's take a
look
here we go is our first try all right
here's our first try
with 7f2
right 7f2 and then here is our last
first try with seven f
five
so we can see that these individual
documents both have an individual ID now
the wonderful thing is that whenever we
create a document
right
all right whenever we create a document
that document automagically that's for
you blah automatically creates the ID so
it's not something that we've told
to do it's not something that we've like
asked it to do just whenever you create
a document it also creates an ID and
this creating of the IDS is going to
really pay off because now we have ways
of targeting specific documents right
starting specific documents and
and we can delete those specific
documents we can update the specific
documents and then as we start to add
more complexity to our applications the
way that different bits of data kind of
works together in is that we're
able to
tie everything back to IDs so our users
will have an individual ID and then each
post that the user makes will have its
own ID and so we can figure out who made
a post by looking at something like a
poster ID that ties back to the original
user so these IDs and I don't want to
kind of big brain us right now with that
but eventually these IDs become really
important because how we're going to
connect different types of data together
that may be in different types of
collections we can go ahead and keep
track of IDs inside of our documents and
tie everything together
cool
uh is there security risk with IDs being
in the HTML there are some things we
have to think through like I said we're
this is not like production ready code
we're being bad is writing bad code
um there will be things we'll do in the
future where it's not like directly
because if the IDS are directly in the
code and you can make client-side
requests and you could like do stuff
with the idea if you wanted so yes there
are ways that you could use this uh
advantageously but right now we only
think about that
boom
Tina says bring it all right so we can
tell that this to do a first try is the
same as the to do first try but they
have different IDs and so since they
have different IDs right since they have
different IDs we're able to Target those
elements individually
but
how do those different IDs wind up in
our HTML like how how did 7f2 and 7f5
both show up in our HTML so that we
could use them and yes it's part of our
ejs it's in the game so let's go and
take a look at our ejs and see where
this is happening where would I find my
ejs
foreign
I gotta record this
I was running through the six with my
woes
hey does this work
foreign
don't work out I got another career
lined up I got another career lined up
let's go only fans
hold on I got a VIP them
oh who said it there you go Dominus
Prime
oh where are you at where are you at
there we go
there we go Dominus Prime he got VIP my
friend
all right
foreign
[Laughter]
crispy nugget we gotta get this EP out
we gotta get this EP out
all right
oh I didn't run ads during break I'm
sorry if folks are getting ads I
apologize I'll run the ads during this
upcoming break all right
so we are going to look
in the ejs for where these IDs are being
added right right so we saw that these
IDs are making their way into the HTML
and these IDs are unique for each
document in our to-do's collection where
the heck are they coming from we know
that if it's if it's rendering in our
views then we should go to our views
folder and look for that to do's ejs and
so inside the to-do's ejs we have some
wonderful code so we have our code block
that opens right with the carrots and
the percent signs or modules or whatever
the heck you want to call them our code
block closes here and the cool thing is
that this code is a for each Loop before
we've seen we just saw like four Loops
but the cool thing is you can use
even like the newer
um the newer kind of es6 plus type
syntax inside of here and so I have this
lovely four each uh on the to do's and
so all of my to-do's from my document
are being passed into this ejs right in
our controller we could see where all
the to-do's are being passed in
and since there are four documents in my
collection we noted this for each Loop
is going to run how many times
four times exactly looks like bees
people do call them bees like I think
that's what a lot of people call them
these days they're like these are
biggies
um
yeah this this for each Loop is going to
run four times and each time it runs
it's going to create this Li
and the cool thing is that we now have
this data ID property right this data ID
property right
and I can plug whatever I want into this
data ID
right I can plug whatever the heck I
want into here and the other cool thing
is that these data properties on HTML5
plus we can actually change this to
whatever we want right so there could be
um
there could be I could call this data
rainbow if I want it it doesn't matter
we can we can change this to whatever we
want data zebra doesn't matter
right the cool thing about these lovely
data attributes is that you can call it
whatever you want right and so I'm going
to keep it as our data ID because what I
am doing is grabbing the ID out of the
document right
and so if we look at our documents we go
back to our mongodb we can see that each
of our documents is going to have an ID
property to do property a completed
property and this like underscore V
property as well right and so what we're
going to do is we're going to yoink this
as we build each of our allies right and
so if we look
our Li we're going to give it this
lovely class and we made up this data
attribute to be data ID and we're going
to plop the ID in remember this l e l is
the element right each of my to Do's
remember it's going to run four times
each time it runs L is going to
represent a different document in that
collection right so the very first time
this runs it's going to be the document
with first try so l or El will represent
the document of first try the next time
it runs it'll be the document of second
try the third time the document a third
try and then the fourth time it is the
other document with the text of first
try so it's just our parameter that's
holding each of those individual
documents and the cool thing is that
each of them will actually just be a
what it's always just what's
foreign
each time it runs
yeah
it's just gonna hold an object each time
that this runs right it's going to hold
an object and so the first time that it
runs the object will be the first try
object the next time it runs it'll be
the second try object these objects are
coming from our collection and since it
is an object right since it's an object
we can grab the properties of that
object so the very first time this runs
we're going to grab that object and
we're going to grab the ID property off
of it so that way when we actually see
in our HTML there will be a data ID and
the value the value that came out of the
document right so that's how we're going
to plug in the individual IDs for each
one
why is it underscore ID because that's
the property on the document that's
that's what automatically creates
for us and so we're going to use that to
our advantage
cool
all right so now we're able to build out
these lies that all have their
individual IDs right welcome Ultra uh
each has their own individual IDs and
these individual IDs are coming from the
actual documents themselves or grabbing
that ID property off of each one right
and plugging it into the Dom eventually
right here so L is going to be just a
bunch of objects exactly because
remember this is just a fancy for Loop
and all this is doing is looping through
all the documents that came from this
collection right we could step back and
see how it got the documents but let's
focus here for a second and just know
that we've passed all the documents
we've handed all of them off to our ejs
template and now we're going to Loop
through all four of those documents and
L or short for elements just going to
hold each of those documents one at a
time the very first time it runs it's
going to grab a different ID than the
second time it runs because that's a
different document from our mongodb
collection cool
how does data ID know to go to mongodb
and get the ID it's not that smart we've
already passed all of the documents into
our ejs template just like we've been
doing in all the past of our credit apps
we've already passed all of those
elements into our ejs now we're just
looping through all of those objects all
those documents that came from the
database I'll show I'll show that again
just so we can see it in a little bit
but we already have all four documents
all four documents have been passed into
this uh ejs template and now we're just
looping through each document one at a
time
uh don't custom don't any custom
attributes work yeah any any any data
whatever you can you change this
whatever you want it could be whatever
you want
cool
all right I also have some other Fancy
Pants stuff here
um that I that I like uh what is what is
this called here
what is this code here
yeah it's a ternary exactly
so instead of having that conditional
logic that we had before like if we look
at our old code
um
look at our old code
we had like this conditional if
completed equals true then we add this
span else we add this span so I did a
ternary which is kind of like an inline
conditional and I'm saying hey
is is the document have a complete does
the document have a completed property
of true if so give it the class of
completed and if it's not true like if
it's false give it the complex the class
of not
right
so I'm just I'm just going ahead and uh
either giving it a completed class or a
not class and where could I go to see
what these classes do
yeah we can go look at our CSS which is
in our public folder if we look at our
CSS uh we can see that the completed
class gives it the line through in Gray
and not just has it be underlined right
so what we're doing is we're just giving
you either the completed class or the
not class using that uh delicious
ternary
ah
cool let's go back and take a look at
our to Do's ejs so we're going to Loop
through all four documents that are in
our collection we're going to put in the
individual IDs we're going to use this
Turner to figure out whether or not has
to complete it or or not class we can
actually see that completed or not
classed here in the inspector so if I
click on the first try
um
uh it it now has the class of completed
you can see it right here if I click on
it again we can see that it has that
class of not right so I'm able to toggle
that class using my ternary
cool
uh can we see that in mongodb yeah sure
so if I let's say I click on third try
third try is the only one that has the
completed class
um so that should be the only one that
is true
let's refresh here
and we see uh first try is fall second
try is false but third try is true and
then the other one is also false as well
the off calling from ejs is super
annoying it's just you just have to tell
vs code that you're using ejs
um I haven't I haven't set the file type
down here to be ejs you can like add it
and like change your your uh your
language and there's a way to do it for
ejs
yeah there's an extension and stuff like
that
cool
um so we are taking all four of those
documents looping through them adding
the Lis that have the individual IDs and
why are we going through this trouble
why are we going through the trouble of
adding the IDS again
yeah it helps us stop with the
duplicates we know that each of those
Li's is unique exactly uh whatever use
Morgan yeah we'll use that in the near
future
cool all right let's just real quick
show how we're getting all the documents
into this ejs file so folks who are
curious about that if we go to our
to-do's controller we can see in our
to-do's controller our get to Do's
function and that function goes and
finds all of our documents right and
then we're passing those documents to do
items into our ejs so this is something
we've seen plenty of times before
um with our previous crud examples
we are going to our database we are
finding all of the documents all those
documents are now stored into do items
and I'm passing to do items into my ejs
template with the name of to-do's so
wherever I see to Do's inside of my ejs
uh it's just the things that came back
from the
um from the the database
now there are some interesting things
that are here that are a little bit
different
um what's missing from right here that
we've used all the time in the past
yeah we have this we normally have two
array why do we need to array right now
why why don't we need to array
yeah because we're using Mongoose uh and
Mongoose kind of makes our life a little
bit easier does a lot of heavy lifting
for us and so Mongoose already knows
that hey you're probably going to want
like an array of these objects and so it
just does that for us right just take
some of that heavy lifting off of our
shoulders and does it for us so we have
here like this to do fine we don't need
the two array it just kind of just works
cool
all right uh so we're gonna take our
break now when we come back from the
break uh we're gonna dive deeper into
looking at the deleting and how we're
going to use those individual IDs and
the updating how we're going to use
those individual IDs and then we'll
answer any other questions that folks
have all right folks let's put seven
minutes on the sorry five minutes on the
timer and we'll be back soon cool all
right everybody Welcome Back come on
back come on back we got a couple other
big things we want to do and then don't
forget we're coming back on Sunday uh
for office hours and going through this
kind of like more step by step so if you
missed Tuesday's class or you still have
a lot of questions no worries we'll have
office hours on Sunday then next week oh
boy we got a lot a lot we got a lot next
week a lot of little stuff that we've
been working on behind the scenes uh and
then also get to authentication so super
excited for next week let's see if you
have any other questions in the slido
[Music]
um
uh this is an important question just
because it's here I wouldn't tell people
out on Discord but I'm autistic and find
it really fast and overwhelming any
suggestions for ways I can contribute to
the community
um so Discord you could ignore pretty
much everything about Discord except for
the things that you care about right so
in Discord we have our help channels and
our help channels are actually threaded
so there's no like boom boom boom one
after another you can go into the help
channels and they are threaded so there
is no kind of like fast pace so if
that's more helpful
um definitely start there
um because that could be pretty helpful
um the other thing that we're doing is
like I said we work on these little
things behind the scenes we're talking
about like other ways for folks that
want to help the community that are
further along in their engineering
career we'll be talking more about those
in the upcoming weeks and we we talked a
little briefly about the 100 maintainers
um where you'll be working with folks to
help kind of on actual code so yeah
totally get it for anyone that's new
here Discord can seem overwhelming when
you first join find your little
Community find your pieces of it but you
can ignore most of it like like each
notification is not important find the
little pockets that are important to you
yeah you can you can individually do
that too yep cool
alrighty
any other big ones here
why don't we use es6 Syntax for this to
do app we are using quite a bit of es6
syntax we're using a lot of it actually
there are some things I think that are
just easier for new folks to understand
if we don't use the newer way of doing
it but there's a lot of es6 mixed in
here
um
and one other thing here that I thought
was important can you please let office
dollars stay on Twitch for longer than
60 days nah unfortunately there's one
there's there's a few things to being
live like I don't want I don't ever want
100 devs to just be like
I don't know like a like a like a course
on teachable or something right where
it's just like you go through it at your
own pace and like there's like you're
just doing it by yourself like you just
do video after video like thing after
thing like I think there's something
special about being live and together
and going through work together
um to where I want to encourage folks to
join us live right like I want you to
participate in the community and so one
of the few things I can do that helps
that is the office hours like there's an
incentive to show up
um because it'll disappear right we're
Community taught right and so
I think that is really important and the
cool thing about office hours is you
could be you can join office hours at
any any point and program and get
something out of it and a lot of times
the office hours aren't like it's just
kind of answering questions right so
there are some office hours where we
focus on specific pieces but at least an
hour or two I always try to do that
first right like the first hour or two
is always kind of just answering
questions that might be helpful to
anyone at any point in the program so
definitely come to office hours I think
that's one of the few things I do to
like keeps Community Live and not just a
static you're just going through the
material on your own
yeah
cool it's also why I pushed Discord so
much right and it's also the reason why
I don't like publish like I know there
are like there are things that people do
like in ketchup crew that like move
through material uh but there's a reason
why I haven't done that right because I
I really do want people using Discord I
really do want people participating and
any little thing I can do to like get
people to
interact with each other that's that's
the goal
yeah
alrighty
let's keep digging folks we got a little
bit more I want to cover tonight
all right
so we
right before break started talking about
the
wonders of
inserting unique IDs and I wanted to
talk about where those unique IDs come
from
Tas for 100 devs no we are Community
taught no one is above another there is
no like
I don't want people blessing each other
with knowledge we come together to work
on stuff you have myself that goes live
you have Maya wolf you have Rufio you
have Fox that go live on Twitch we have
so many other folks that are uh
hopefully joining the stream team soon
that go live
um we we have so many folks that are
part of this community that like take
time out of their day to help each other
um that
yeah there's no need for that and then
folks just helping in the Discord
channels right uh it's it's it's
beautiful to see so
um
thank you to everyone that does help if
you've ever answered a question in the
help Channel you're doing more than you
realize because Community talks a real
thing and it's helped so many folks get
wonderful jobs uh wonderful
opportunities coming their way so yeah
if you want to help jump on Discord and
start helping that's my thing people
that want to help will find a way to
help
um folks that when I sell you stuff
might pretend to do it but the folks
that really do want to help they just
help you know and so if you're that
person you feel like you know what I
want to help others learn how to code
maybe you're an engineer that's further
along in your career pathway and you
think you've learned a thing or two and
you want to help others jump on Discord
we need it maybe appreciated
me
all right so
we were showing those individual IDs
right
we had those individual IDs oh yeah
shout out the Rascal too too yeah thank
you rascal I appreciate all the work you
do yeah
um we were putting in those individual
IDs where folks are like Leon where are
those individual IDs coming from where
are those documents coming from in the
past right
right in the past we had this DB dot
collections
dot find right we had that whole string
but right now what has replaced our DB
connection and like anything that has to
do with interacting with our database
what has that been
what is that being replaced by
the model exactly the models handling
all the stuff that has to do with
talking to our database and so
you can see that we've we've required
our to do model up here and so we're
using that to do model in conjunction
with Mongoose to go and get all of our
documents and so we are using the model
that knows what database to connect to
how to talk to the database all that fun
stuff uh Mongoose is handling that for
us and then we're doing find so that's
going to give us all the documents out
of our to-do's collection we're storing
all those documents in the to do items
right and then eventually we're passing
those to do items into the ejs just like
we've done for the past couple of times
with our crud applications if you're new
and like that hop skip and a jump is too
much go back to our earlier crud videos
where we spend a lot of time and detail
on like all right how is the to-do's
getting into the EGS but that's what's
Happening Here we also have this lovely
count documents which is a wonderful
method that will look for how many
documents have this match right of
completed false what the heck is this
enabling us to do this line right here
line seven
what is that enabling us to do
yeah it's enabling us to count how many
things are still left to be done because
remember
when we click on our items right like
when we when we click on like go with
refresh real quick make sure we're up to
date when I click on first try
I have changed that completed property
right from false to true so now we know
there are four documents in our
collection
two of them will have the completed of
true and two of them will have the
completed of false and so the cool thing
is that this line of code can count how
many documents in our collection have
the completed property of false and so
we can also pass that into our ejs as
well and when we're looking at our ejs
we can see that we're using the left
value here so we're just plugging in how
many items we have left to complete
we're just plugging that in as like a
variable that we pass through and if we
look
one more time at the
to-do's controller
we can see that we've passed in wherever
we see items left right this is the
items left we've passed that in items
left gets passed in with the name of
left so wherever I see left inside of my
ejs right wherever I see left inside of
my ejs that's the number of items that
are left to be completed
cool
alrighty
now
there's one other tricky bit that's
happening here right and it's this kind
of like this this this idea of
completing or not completing I want to
talk through that we're going to look at
the models a little bit and then
um we'll we'll see if there's any
questions at the end so when I click on
this first try
what actually hears the click
right
what actually here's the click
yeah our client side code our
client-side Smurf here's the click
right here's the click
and what it's going to do is
is it going to try and grab because in
the past every time we've done this
before it's just grab the text of first
try and then we send that text and we
try to find that text in the database to
delete to change that document right but
are we going to do that anymore are we
going to grab the text of this
now we can use the ID now right we can
use that ID so let's go ahead and look
at our client-side JavaScript and see
that in action
all right let's go to our public go to
our JavaScript main.js and so
here we have this lovely uh client-side
JavaScript all set up to handle
different types of clicks so we have a
click on the delete we have our
um are to do items that are not
completed and are to do items that are
completed because remember the spans
could have the completed or the not
class depending if they have been
clicked on or not all right so if they
have been clicked on they get that class
that helps us like make them gray and
and strike through and then the not
clashes make sure that they are
underlined cool
alrighty so
if we are clicking on let's say we're
clicking on this first try for the very
first time three two one click right
that originally right that originally
right that click
will be heard right by the the wonderful
uh one of these two wonderful event
listeners these two Smurfs right if it's
if it has the not class it'll be the
first one and if it has the completed
class it'll be the second one and so
we're able to listen for those two
different types of Click has it been
completed or not based on the class that
it has that's all we're doing right now
if we look at the very first time we run
this we'll run the lovely Mark complete
right that's the function that we're
going to call we just clicked on a to-do
item that was not yet completed right so
we're going to run that Mark complete
function
that Mark complete function is going to
grab that item a little bit differently
right it's going to grab that item a
little bit differently right and like I
said this is a jump it's not exactly how
we do it in production but we're getting
closer to it and so the thing I just
clicked on
we're going to say all right well I just
clicked on that span right if we look at
the actual text the thing that had the
text first try that I was clicking on
was the span so if I want this ID what
do I have to do how do I go up a level
how do I go from the span up a level to
the Li
parent node will be one way to go from
the span up to the L line so that's what
you're going to see here we're going to
see all right I just clicked on that
text this the thing I clicked on we're
going to go up a level to the Li
D and then we're going to look at the
data attributes so the cool thing is
that we can make up any data attribute
that we want right we could have called
it data ID data rainbow data zebra data
duck it doesn't matter we can access all
of those independent or different data
attributes by using the data set and
then the attribute that we care about
right so we called ours data hyphen ID
we could have done data hyphen rabbit
data if and duck does it matter and then
we just would have changed this to be
what it was rainbow
duck right but we called it ID because
we were using the ID right
cool
cool so now we went ahead and we were
able to grab that ID and the cool thing
is we know that these IDs are unique to
each individual document in our
collection so when we go ahead and make
our request right when we make our
request to our server we're able to pass
in that unique ID right so we're making
a put request we're passing along that
unique ID and when we look at our
controller
all right well let's look at our routes
first all right well we made a put
request
on the mark complete route
put request on the mark complete route
remember we we get to say what type of
requests we're making and what the route
was that what came from our client-side
JavaScript and the router said all right
I heard your put request on the mark
complete route go ahead to the to Do's
controller and use the mark complete
method so we go to our to-do's
controller we find the mark complete
method and what are we going to do well
we're going to find one document and
update it so what document are we going
to find we're going to find the document
whose ID
matches the ID we just sent along right
so that we've seen this pattern 20 times
before already when that put request was
sent to our server not only do we send
the put requests but we send we sent
that ID along with it as well and now
we're able to use that ID we're going to
find one document that has that ID and
we're going to update it from completed
whatever it was to true
right so we were able to set that to
true
there are some other stuff that's going
to happen we'll respond back to our
client-side JavaScript the page will
refresh yada yada we've done this
bazillion times right but it's still the
same process just because we're adding
an extra layer of abstraction doesn't
mean the core stuff is changing right
it's still the same crud app that we've
been building up to it's just that now
we're getting a little bit more robust
and a little bit more abstraction so
when we're working with others we're not
stumbling over other people's mistakes
and we're able to kind of go exactly
where we need to go
let's look at that one more time let's
try a little bit differently now uh
we're gonna click on this let's take a
look at this one we can see that this
first try span has the completed class
right
has the completed class so when I click
on it
we actually used a different click event
right let's go back to our client-side
JavaScript public folder main.js all
right
we clicked on something that had the
completed class so that's going to be a
different function that is called we're
going to call the mark in complete
function right we're going to call the
mark incomplete function and this Mark
incomplete function is going to be a
slightly different function down here
here's Mark complete here's Mark
incomplete this Mark incomplete does
almost exactly the same stuff
except that when it makes the put
request it's a slightly different route
right it's a slightly different route
before it was to Do's Mark complete now
it is to Do's Mark incomplete so we have
to go to our router our router's gonna
be listening for that to Do's Mark
incomplete let's take a look
router
to do's
Mark incomplete all right we heard the
put request that came along with Mark
incomplete go to your to-do's controller
and find the mark incomplete function to
Do's controller Mark incomplete function
and it's almost exactly the same except
instead of it being completed true it's
completed false
cool
alrighty
no res redirect well we're gonna respond
back to that request that came from the
client-side JavaScript right like that
we're going to respond back and then
it's the client-side JavaScript that's
doing the reloading for us in this case
lots of bouncing around but makes total
sense hey good to hear it and if it
doesn't make sense
come back Sunday
we'll have more time we'll go through
the whole thing again come to office
hours this Sunday
1 p.m Eastern Time 10 10 a.m PST
cool
makes sense couldn't make it myself
and guess what a lot of other developers
couldn't a lot of developers that are
getting paid six figures couldn't do
this from scratch right it's just it's
just it's just not
a good use of your time
it's just not a good use of your time
right my dog keeps opening and closing
the door
I have a dog that can open doors
that's why sometimes you can hear the
little one in the background is because
the dog decided to open the door and
come see what I was up to
laughs
yeah so what I was saying is like like
it's your job is to know how to bring
all these things together to research
different ways of doing things to pull
all the pieces together like you you are
an engineer Engineers don't do stuff
from scratch Engineers can go look up
formulas Engineers can go look up the
right tool for the job you wouldn't
expect an engineer to necessarily be
swinging the hammer right when there's
been a something that's been developed
to help them do the job you are all here
are all Engineers writing the individual
lines and knowing every individual piece
from memory is not a good use of your
time right we work smarter than that we
have the templates that we have we can
pull the pieces in together you have to
understand how the system comes together
but the individual lines that doesn't
come until you've been doing this for
for years right
oh
all right
questions while we're here questions
while we're here
if I want to be a carpenter you're first
gonna need to learn how to build a saw
from raw metal exactly now we just don't
do that right
real Engineers uninstall the windows
calculator right a new one from scratch
whenever they need to perform a
calculation exactly
uh Jayhawk I think your question got uh
blanked out I think you said could you
go over a parent node again parent node
is just when we're looking at the span
right the span is inside of the LI so if
I'm actually clicking on the text I'm
actually clicking on this text that's in
the spanner first try but the idea I
want is up here on the LI so to go up a
level I can do parent node
we could have also done like query
selector and a bunch of other stuff but
my goal is to show you a lot of
different stuff and then build up to the
more performant ways of doing stuff to
build up to the ways we'll actually do
it in production
Bravos yeah you can think of the model
exports at modular exports is like just
functions ready to be called or objects
ready to be used until they're required
uh the data ID gets set on the first get
request right exactly yep when that get
request comes through or actually on EV
right now on every single get request
we're redoing the Dom right on every
single refresh this all gets repainted
um and so maybe that's something we
might think about when we get to react
is like do we need to be repainting the
whole Dom every single time yikes
hey the last two classes really helped
solidify this concept for me I
whiteboarded a presentation of this to
my niece today in a surprise level
understanding talking through it yes
let's go uh that's the beauty of of
working through this uh specifically the
lecture I know it sounds like a silly
assignment but I trust trust me if you
just do it you're gonna walk away with
so much more like it's one thing to
learn it's a whole other thing to teach
and the way our brains work is we get
all these new connections when we try
and explain something to someone else
right and so just the act of building
the lecture uh and figuring out all the
gaps the things that don't make sense
and investing time and understanding
them and then trying to articulate in a
way that makes sense to others that just
like is like cheat mode it's like it
just does something in your brain that's
going to help this click a little bit
more and then the things that you're
still really struggling with you come to
office hours on Sunday
so please do the assignment and it'll
really help
mine will say secondly I say I do this
all the time it really is it really does
um help the the thing sink in so try
give it a try
cool
all right let's take a look at the uh
slido real quick
I'm going camping next week I submit my
MVC lecture early
um no but you can it'll be open on
Tuesday
sorry
I probably won't announce the winner for
a week so you'll have some time
[Music]
variables using the index where are the
functions
uh variables used on the index where the
functions for example on the items left
where is the function that
decrements minus one oh I give you mean
so this so this is a really interesting
question so in our to-do's controller we
have this count documents uh so there's
nothing that's like like subtracting or
adding what this is doing is literally
counting the documents inside of our
collection so it's going to and
literally counting how many of these
things there are
um so that's where that's coming from uh
if you're building like a super serious
application you might store that number
into memory so that you're not like
counting because that might be like
incrementally faster but one of the
things you have to realize right now is
like none of these automations like
matter until you're on the job and when
you're on the job you'll just research
the way to make it more optimal right
it's not something you have to know in
this moment especially when you're first
learning there are so many ways that we
can make this code more optimal more
efficient but it's this is a learning
exercise right we have to get there and
to add all those little bits and Bobs
it's just too overwhelming let's
understand the core of what's Happening
understand what MVC might bring to the
table and we'll have time to add all
this extra stuff
so you have the presentation you have to
do the other thing I'm going to ask is
to tweak this in some way make some
changes to this figure out something you
want to modify about this application
right because the way you learn the way
you're going to learn especially this
part of programming going forward is by
building please don't just listen to me
and then go home and do Banky and that's
it right please actually break this
build with it play with it get stuck get
lost
bring it back to life jump in a Discord
voice Channel say hey I'm gonna do X Y
and Z come join me as I do it right like
Bill Bill build if if at this point in
time you are not building you are
messing up right you're gonna learn so
much more from building than you are
from just listening to me right listen
to me to maybe understand how this all
comes together and then build
comment that at least oh that's a really
good idea yeah so at least comment it
right right
on the job unfortunately you're not
going to get paid to listen to me
anymore right like you're going to get
paid to build stuff so start practicing
the building too
and then maybe incorporate the thing
that you changed into your presentation
cool
all right any other questions trying
this one down cool
all right
cool let's let's end with a raid and
then we're gonna come back on Sunday
we're gonna go from beginning to end on
Sunday and I'm gonna answer all your
questions it'll be traditional office
hours so if you got questions about this
code bring them if you got questions
about the hunt anything in general uh
come back on Sunday and we'll go through
it all together